1

A survey of synthetic data augmentation
methods in computer vision
Alhassan Mumuni1∗, Fuseini Mumuni2 and Nana Kobina Gerrar1
Abstract—The standard approach to tackling computer vision problems is to train deep convolutional neural network (CNN) models
using large-scale image datasets which are representative of the target task. However, in many scenarios, it is often challenging to
obtain sufficient image data for the target task. Data augmentation is a way to mitigate this challenge. A common practice is to explicitly
transform existing images in desired ways so as to create the required volume and variability of training data necessary to achieve
good generalization performance. In situations where data for the target domain is not accessible, a viable workaround is to synthesize
training data from scratch—i.e., synthetic data augmentation. This paper presents an extensive review of synthetic data augmentation
techniques. It covers data synthesis approaches based on realistic 3D graphics modeling, neural style transfer (NST), differential
neural rendering, and generative artificial intelligence (AI) techniques such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) and variational
autoencoders (VAEs). For each of these classes of methods, we focus on the important data generation and augmentation techniques,
general scope of application and specific use-cases, as well as existing limitations and possible workarounds. Additionally, we provide
a summary of common synthetic datasets for training computer vision models, highlighting the main features, application domains and
supported tasks. Finally, we discuss the effectiveness of synthetic data augmentation methods. Since this is the first paper to explore
synthetic data augmentation methods in great detail, we are hoping to equip readers with the necessary background information and
in-depth knowledge of existing methods and their attendant issues.
Index Terms—Data augmentation, generative AI, neural rendering, data synthesis, synthetic data, neural style transfer.

✦

1

I NTRODUCTION

1.1

Background

Currently, deep learning is the most important technique
for solving many complex machine vision problems. Stateof-the-art deep learning models typically contain very large
number of parameters that need to be learned in order to
characterize a wide range of visual phenomena. Moreover,
as a result of the enormous appearance variations of realworld objects and scenes, there is often the need to introduce
various variations of the available data during training.
Consequently, training deep learning models require very
huge amount of annotated data to guarantee good generalization performance and avoid overfitting. However, data
collection and annotation are often time-consuming and
costly exercises. Instead of attempting to collect very large
quantities of annotated data, it is often more practical to create new samples artificially. Data augmentation is the process of creating new data to artificially extend training set.
Typically, the process of augmentation involves performing
transformations on the original data so as to alter them
in a particular way. The transformation operations usually
change the visual characteristics of the data but preserve
their labels. Data augmentation (DA) can, thus, be seen
as a means for simulating real-world behavior such as the
visual appearance of objects and scenes under different view
angles, pose variations, object deformations, lens distortions
and other camera artifacts. In practice, there are several
•

1Cape Coast Technical University, Cape Coast, Ghana.

•

2University of Mines and Technology, UMaT, Tarkwa, Ghana

∗Corresponding author, E-mail: alhassan.mumuni@cctu.edu.gh

situations in which the training of machine learning (ML)
models may require data augmentation. The commonest
scenarios include the following:
•
•
•

•
•

•

Training a deep learning models but the quantity of
training data is small
Adequate training data exists but is of perceptually
poor quality (e.g., low resolution, hazy or blurry)
Available training data is not representative of the
target data (e.g., does not have adequate appearance
variations)
The proportion of various classes is skewed (imbalanced data)
Data is only available for one condition (e.g., bright
day) but there is the need to train models to perform inference under different set of conditions (e.g.,
night, rainy or foggy weather)
There is no practical way to access data for training
(e.g., excessive cost or restriction)

The first four problems can be adequately solved by
manipulating the existing data to produce additional data
that enhances the overall performance of the trained model.
In the case of the last two problems, however, the only viable
solution is to create new training data.
1.2

Significance of synthetic data augmentationn

As discussed earlier, the commonest approach to data augmentation is to transform training data in various ways.
However, in application scenarios where no training data
exists naturally, or where its collection is too costly, it often
becomes impractical to create additional training data using

2

the aforementioned methods. Moreover, many computer
vision tasks are often use-case sensitive, requiring taskspecific data formats and annotation schemes. This makes
it difficult for broadly-annotated, publicly-available largescale datasets to meet the specific requirements of these
tasks. In these cases, the only viable approach is to generate
training data from scratch. Modern image synthesis methods can simulate different kinds of task-specific, real-world
variability in the synthesized data. They are particularly
useful in applications such as autonomous driving and navigation [1], [2], pose estimation [3], [4], affordance learning
[5], [6], object grasping [7], [8] and manipulation [9], [10],
where obtaining camera-based images is time-consuming
and expensive. Moreover, in some applications,bitmap pixel
images may simply be unsuitable. Data synthesis methods
can readily support non-standard image modalities such as
point clouds and voxels. Approaches based on 3D modeling
also provide more scalable resolutions as well as flexible
content and labeling schemes that is adapted for the specific
use-case.
1.3

Motivation for this survey

Data augmentation approaches based on data synthesis are
becoming increasingly important in the wake of severe data
scarcity in many machine learning domains. In addition,
the requirements of emerging machine vision applications
such as autonomous driving, robotics and virtual reality are
increasingly becoming difficult to be met using traditional
data transformation-based augmentation. For this reason,
data synthesis has become an important means to provide
quality training data for machine learning applications. Unfortunately, however, while many surveys on data augmentation approaches exist, very few works deal with synthetic
data augmentation methods. This work is motivated by
the lack of adequate discussion on this important class
of techniques in the scientific literature. Consequently, we
aim to provide an in-depth treatment of synthetic data
augmentation methods to enriched the current literature on
data augmentation. We discuss the various issues on data
synthesis in detail, including concise information about the
main principles, use-cases and limitations of the various
approaches.
1.4

Outline of work

In this work, we first provide a broad overview of data
augmentation in Section 2 and provide a concise taxonomy
of synthetic data augmentation approaches in Section 3. Further, in Section 4 through 7, we explore in detail the various
techniques for synthesizing data for machine vision tasks.
Here we discuss the important principles, approaches, usecases and limitations of each of the main classes of methods.
The approaches surveyed in this work are generative modeling, computer graphics modeling, neural rendering, and
neural style transfer (NST). We present a detailed discussion
of each of these approaches in the following sections. We
also compare the advantages and disadvantages of these
classes of data synthesis methods. We summarize the main
features of common synthetic datasets in Section 8. In Section 9 we discuss the effectiveness of synthetic data augmentation in machine vision domains. We present a summary

of the main issues in Section 10 and outline promising
directions for future research in Section 11. Finally, conclude
in Section 12. A detailed outline of this survey is presented
in Figure 1.

2

O VERVIEW OF DATA AUGMENTATION METHODS

Geometric data augmentation methods such as affine transformations [11], projective transformation [12] and nonlinear deformation [13] are aimed at creating various transformations of the original images to encode invariance to
spatial variations resulting from, for example, changes in
object size, orientation or view angles. Common geometric
transformations include rotation, shearing, scaling or resizing, nonlinear deformation, cropping and flipping. On the
other hand, photometric techniques – for example, color
jittering [14], lighting perturbation [15], [16] and image
denoising [17] – manipulate the qualitative properties – for
example, image contrast, brightness, color, hue, saturation
and noise levels – and thereby render the resulting deep
learning models invariant to changes in these properties.
In general, to ensure good generalization performance in
different scenarios, it is often necessary to apply many of
these procedures simultaneously.
Recently, more advanced data augmentation methods
have become common. One of the most important class
of techniques [18], [19], [20], [21] is based on transforming
different image regions discretely instead of uniformly manipulating the entire input space. This type of augmentation
methods have been shown to be effective in simulating complex visual effects such as non-uniform noise, non-uniform
illumination, partial occlusion and out-of-plane rotations.
The second main direction of data augmentation exploits
feature space transformation as a means of introducing variability of training data. These regularization approaches manipulate learned feature representations within deep CNN
layers to transform the visual appearance of the underlying images. Examples of feature-level transformation approaches include feature mixing [18], [22] , feature interpolation [23], feature dropping [24] and selective augmentation
of useful features [25]. These methods do not often lead to
semantically meaningful alterations. Nonetheless, they have
proven very useful in enhancing the performance of deep
learning models. The third direction is associated with the
automation of the augmentation process. To achieve this,
typically, different transformation operations based on traditional image processing techniques are applied to manually
generate various primitive augmentations. Optimization algorithms are then used to automatically find the best model
hyperparameters, as well as the augmentation types and
their magnitudes for the given task.
The approaches described above are realizable only
when training data exists, and the goal of augmentation is
to transform the available data to obtain desirable features.
This work focuses on approaches that seek to generate novel
training data even in cases where data for the target task is
inaccessible.
Several survey works (e.g., [26], [27], [28], [28], [29], [30])
have explored data augmentation in great detail. Shorten
et al. [27], in particular, present a broad discussion of important data augmentation methods. However, like most

3

1. Introduction

1.1. Background
1.2. Overview of data augmentatin methods
1.3. The need for synthetic data augmentation
1.4. Outline of survey

2. Overview of DA methods
3. Taxonomy of approaches
4.1. Common generative network models for DA

4. Generative modeling

4.2. Approaches to DA with generative modeling
4.3. Limitations and workarounds of GM

5.1. Approaches

5. Computer graphics modeling

4.2.1. Image synthesis
4.2.2. Image-to-image translation
4.2.3. Image manipulation
4.2.4. Image quality enhancement

5.1.1. CAD modeling
5.1.2. Obtaining data from 3D physics engines
5.1.3. Obtaining data directly from Video games
5.1.4. Scanning of real objects
5.1.5. Combining synthetic with real data
5.1.6. Integrating virtual & real worlds

5..2. Challenges of computer graphics-based synthesis and workarounds
5.3. Tasks not requiring realistic models

6. Neural rendering

6.1. Differential neural rendering
6.2. Scene representation methods

6.2.1. Explicit representation of scene primitives
6.2.2. Implicit (neural) representation

6.3. Approaches and use-cases of neural rendering in DA
6.4. Limitations and workarounds

6.3.1. 2D to 2D synthesis
6.3.2. 2D to 3D synthesis (scene reconstruction)
6.3.3. 3D to 3D synthesis

7.1. Basic principles of NST

7. Neural style transfer (NST)

8. Synthetic datasets

7.2. NST as a data augmentation method
7.3.1. Introducing diversity through artistic stylization
7.3. Approaches to DA with NST
7.3.2. Photorealistic data synthesis
7.3.3. Patch-level synthesis
7.4. Limitations and workarounds

9. Effectiveness of synthetic data augmentation
10. Summary & discussion
11. Future research directions
12. Conclusion
Figure 1. Detailed outline of work

previous surveys, their coverage of data synthesis methods
is rather limited.

3

To address this gap, in this surveys, we focus mainly on
data augmentation techniques that generate synthetic data
for training machine learning models in computer vision domains. data augmentation methods. The main approaches
covered here are methods based on generative AI, procedural data generation using 3D CAD tools and game engines,
differential neural rendering and neural style transfer. We
consider that such a narrow scope will enable us to provide
a much detailed treatment of topic and its important issues
while at the same time maintain a relatively concise volume.

In practice, four main classes of synthetic data generation
techniques are commonly used:

T AXONOMY OF SYNTHETIC DATA AUGMENTATION

METHODS

•
•
•
•

generative modeling
computer graphics modeling
neural rendering
neural style transfer

Generative modeling methods rely on learning the inherent statistical distribution of input data in order to
(automatically) generate new data. The second class of

4
Image synthesis

most popular neural network architectures for generative
modeling.

Image-to-image translation
Generative modeling
Image manipulation

Data synthesis approaches

Image quality enhancement
Traditional CAD modeling
3D game engines and physics
modeling
Computer graphics modeling
3D scanning of real objects
Real-virtual world integration
Explicit neural representation
Neural rendering

Implicit neural representation
Neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRFs)
Artistic style transfer

Neural style transfer (NST)
Photorealistic stylization

4.1

Common generative AI models for data generation

a. Generative adversarial network (GAN)
The general structure of the GAN is shown in Figure
3a. For image generation, the basic working principle of the
GAN is as follows. A generator samples multi-dimensional
noise from a random distribution and converts this noise
into a representation similar to real images. A discriminator then tries to distinguish between real images and the
artificially generated samples and provides feedback about
its predictions to the generator. The generator, aiming to
produce samples that are indistinguishable from real ones,
iteratively refines its prediction based on the feedback error
computed by the loss function. In a similar way, the discriminator uses its own loss to improve subsequent predictions.
This process eventually leads to the model generating highquality images. The vanilla GAN uses fully connected multilayer deep neural network architecture for the implementation of both Generator and Discriminator sub-models.

a

Real images

Figure 2. Taxonomy of synthetic data augmentation approaches

Loss
Discriminator
Discriminator

approaches, computer graphics modeling, are based on the
elaborate process of manually constructing 3D models of
objects and scenes with the aid of computer graphics tools.
Neural rendering approaches are based on special methods
for constructing novel data using conventional feedforward
neural network architectures are described. They allow deep
neural networks to generate completely new images by
learning intermediate 3D representations. Where needed,
the generated 3D data can be used for training. The fourth
class of methods are known as neural style transfer. These
approaches combine features of different semantic levels
extracted from different images to create a new set of images. A general classification of synthetic data augmentation
approaches is depicted in Figure 2.

4

G ENERATIVE MODELING

Generative AI techniques present the most promising
prospect for generating synthetic datasets for complex computer vision tasks. Generative modeling methods are a class
of deep learning techniques that utilize special deep neural
network architectures to learn holistic representation of the
underlying categories in order to generate useful synthetic
data for training deep learning models. Generally, they work
by learning possible statistical distributions of the target
data using noise or examples of target data as input. This
knowledge about the distribution of training data, thus, can
enable them to generate complex representations. Examples
of generative models include Boltzmann machines (BMs)
[31] and restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) [32], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [33], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [34], autoregressive models [35] and deep
belief networks (DBNs) [36]. Currently, GANs and VAEs
and their various variants such as [37], [38], [39] are the

Fake images
Random Noise

Generator

Real images

b
Condition

Loss

Discriminator
Discriminator
Fake images
Random Noise

Generator

Figure 3. Functional block diagram of a basic GAN (a) and Conditional
GAN (b) models.

In the Conditional GAN (cGAN) [40], the generation
process is conditioned on control input to the generator
and discriminator (Figure 3 (b)). This provides additional
information that helps the network to reproduce desired
characteristics in the target class. From a simple, fully connected architecture in [33], [40], many new architectural
innovations have been introduced to improve the GAN’s
ability to model data in image domains. Notable among
these include the Deep Convolutional GAN (DCGAN),
which employs convolutional layers for the generator and
transpose-convolutional layers for the discriminator instead
of fully connected layers throughout; the Laplace Pyramid GAN (LAPGAN) [41], which uses multiple generatordiscriminator pairs in a multi-scale pyramidal structure;
Information Maximizing Generative Adversarial Network

5

(InfoGAN) [42], which proposes a non-conventional representation of the multi-dimensional noise, dividing it into
an input noise vector and a latent variable, in order to
help learn complex factors that control image appearance;
Super Resolution GAN (SRGAN) [43], utilizes deep CNN
together with adversarial networks to significantly increase
the resolution training images; Pix2pix [40] propose paired
image-based image-to-image translation approach using a
cGAN model, DiscoGAN [44] and CycleGAN [45] both
utilize a pair of generators and discriminators to perform
unsupervised image-to-image translation (i.e., they convert
images from one style to the another without using paired
images); and Self-Attention GAN (SAGAN) [46], which
incorporates attention mechanism into the GAN structure
to model more global visual features and long-term dependencies. These and many other improvements have enabled
GANs to synthesize high-detailed, photorealistic images
with natural texture and lighting for training deep models.
Figure 5 provides a visual illustration of how GANs have
advanced over the years. Figure 6 shows how photorealistic
images can be generated by modern generative adversarial
networks (in this case BigGAN )can generate. In Figure 8,
we show the multi-view 3D image synthesis capabilities of
several state-of-the-art GAN models: GRAF [47], GIRAFFE
[48], pi-GAN [49] and MVCGAN [50].
Some GAN models [51], [52], [53], [54] incorporate
autoencoders into their structures to learn a latent space
in which different images attributes (e.g., object texture,
pose, or facial expression) can be easily manipulated. An
autoencoder is basically made up of an encoder and decoder sub-models. The encoder transforms input data into
a random, lower-dimensional representation in latent space.
The decoder reconstructs the original data by mapping the
low-dimensional data in the high-dimensional output space.
The overall goal is to guarantee that the reconstructed data
is as similar as possible to the original data. Models that
employ autoencoders in their structure are able to learn a
joint distribution of data and latent variables. Learning this
joint space simplifies the process of creating desirable visual
characteristics in output space as this can be accomplished
indirectly by manipulating latent variables.
b. Variational autoencoders
Another class of generative AI techniques that has
shown enormous promise is the variational autoencoder
(VAE). Like the generative adversarial network, the variational autoencoder can be trained to generate novel data
from a given domain. In addition to data generation, VAEs,
like GANs, can perform tasks such as anomaly detection
and correction, noise elimination, and data refinement. As
we will see in Subsection 4.2, all these use-cases are important data augmentation functions in computer vision.
Variational autoencoders are commonly used jointly with
GANs and other generative models to achieve better results.
They have been used to synthesize realistic images, videos
as well as text for computer vision tasks.

a
Input
image

Reconstructed
image
Latent
features

Encoder

b

Decoder

Condition information

Input
image

Reconstructed
image
Latent
features

Encoder

Decoder

Figure 4. Functional block diagram of a basic VAE (a) and Conditional
VAE (b) models.

2014

2015

2016

2017

Figure 5. The rapidly improving performance of generative adversarial
networks. Shown here is the quality of generated images by state-of-theart models through the period 2014 to 2017. Images courtesy Brundage
et al. [55].

Figure 6. High quality photorealistic images generated by BigGAN [56].

The VAE (Figure 4a) was first proposed by Kingma and
Welling in [34]. Since then, VAEs have been widely used
to generate data for training deep learning models. Similar
to GANs, VAEs learn the probability distribution of input
data to help generate new data with similar characteristics.
VAE first maps each input point to a normal distribution in
a latent space using the encoder sub-model. The decoder
then samples from this normal distribution to generate
new samples, ensuring that the distribution of the real
and generated data is as close as possible. The conditional
variational autoencoder (cVAE), like the conditional GAN,
uses additional metadata to generate outputs based on desirable characteristics defined by conditional input (Figure
4b). Since by their nature VAEs are not susceptible to the
mode collapse problem that GANs suffer from, and GANs
generate much perceptually-better images as compared to
VAEs, many recent works (e.g., [37], [38], [39], [57] have

6

proposed more complex generative modeling frameworks
that leverage the advantages of both types of models.
4.2 Approaches to image data augmentation with generative AI models
In the context of data augmentation, generative models can
be applied in several different ways. These include to generate new images, to transfer specific image characteristics
from source to target images, and to enhance the perceptual
quality or diversity of training data. data augmentation
approaches based on these different principles have been
used in diverse computer vision tasks, including medical
image classification [58], [59], object detection [60], pose estimation [61] and visual tracking [62]. Common approaches
to solving data augmentation problems based on generative
modeling techniques are presented in subsections 4.2.1 to
4.2.4. The key aspects and application scenarios of these
methods are summarized in Table 1.
4.2.1
Image synthesis
In application settings where it is difficult or impossible to
obtain sufficient labelled data, the main goal of generative
modeling is to generate synthetic data [63], [64], [65], [66],
[67] to be used in place of, or in combination with real
data. Models used in this situation are aimed at synthesizing specific categories of image data to aid training.
The primary objective of the generative modeling, then,
is to generate samples that cover the distribution of the
underlying categories. This type of data can be achieved
with conventional CNN-based GAN architectures without
utilizing conditional information as in the case of conditional GANs or conditional VAEs. For example, Kaplan et
al. [68] demonstrated the ability of GAN and VAE to generate photorealistic retinal images without using conditional
information. In [64], Bowles et al. employ a PGGAN model
to synthesize images for Computed Tomography (CT) and
Magnetic Resonance (MR) image segmentation tasks. The
authors showed that using GANs to generate synthetic
images improves segmentation performance on the two
different tasks, irrespective of the original data size and
the proportion of synthetic samples added. To improve the
perceptual quality of generated images, several GANs may
be used, each tuned for creating specific category (e.g., in
[63]). In [66], Souly et al. proposed generative adversarial
network to generate large amount of labeled images in a
semi-supervised manner using unlabeled GAN-synthesized
image data to help in semantic segmentation tasks.
4.2.2
Image-to-image translation
Image-to-image translation [40] is a technique used to transform an image by transferring its content into the visual
style of another image. In its basic form, the approach involves learning a mapping from source to target domain.The
approaches rely on principles of conditional generation using models such as cGANs and cVAEs. Generative modeling methods based on image-to-image translation can be
used to convert images from one color space to another.
In particular, approaches for converting among infrared,
grayscale and RGB color images are common [73], [74].
The techniques can also enable different visual effects and

specific features such as contrast, texture, illumination and
other complex photometric transformations which would
otherwise be challenging for traditional augmentation approaches. The approach, as a data augmentation method,
has a wide scope of applications in computer vision. In medical imaging applications, for example, approaches based on
image-to-image translation can be used to transfer images
from one modality to another (e.g., from CT to MRI or X-ray
image format). Figure 7 shows different translations using
StyleGAN model [45].
Another important application of image-to-image translation is to synthesize view-consistent scenes, where 3D
information and the overall spatial structure of the scene
is preserved in the process of translation [49], [75]. This
is extremely useful in semantic scene understanding tasks.
Image-to-image translation approaches have also been
widely used to generate images of novel views from particular views such as frontal facial views from angular views
(e.g., [76], [77]) or to produce different human poses from
a single pose (e.g., [78]). The effectiveness of image-toimage translation as a viable data augmentation strategy
has also been demonstrated in challenging computer vision
tasks such as visual tracking [79], [80], [81], person reidentification [82], [83], [84], object detection under severe
occlusion [85] and strong lighting conditions [86]. Figure
8 depicts multi-view images generated by different GAN
models.
While traditional image-to-image translation approaches
[40] are generally based on cGANs and cVAEs architectures
that utilize paired images, new techniques are based on the
concept of cyclic consistency. For example, CycleGAN [45]
DualGAN [87] and DiscoGAN [44] can translate images
from one style to another without paired images. These
methods learn a mapping function between source and
target image domains by means of unsupervised learning—that is, images in the target domain do not have corresponding examples in the source. The approach is useful
in many practical application since it is often challenging
to obtain paired images in real-world scenarios for training
machine learning models. For instance, for a specific environment, images for autonomous driving tasks may only
be available for a limited set of weather conditions, but it
may be required to improve robustness by training on a
wide range of possible conditions. In such a situation, with
unpaired image-to-image translation methods, the available
content image can be transferred to all desired visual appearances without requiring additional content images.
The integration of large language models (LLMs) [88]
and vision-language model (VLMs) [89] with GANs, VAEs
and other generative models allows the process of imageto-image translation to be automated using textual prompts.
LLMs and VLMs can also enable textual descriptions of visual scenes to be automatically generated as supplementary
input for training computer vision models.
4.2.3
Image manipulation
Another common generative modeling approach to data
augmentation is to qualitatively transform training data in
desired ways by performing specific photometric (e.g., [91],
[92]) and geometric ( [71], [93], [94], [95]) image manipulations. Photometric image operations such as binarization

7

Figure 7. Examples of image-to-image translation by CycleGAN [45].

a

b
c

d
Figure 8. Photorealistic, multi-view images generated by 3D-aware image synthesis approaches: (a) GRAF [47], (b) GIRAFFE [48], (c) pi-GAN [49]
and (d) MVCGAN [50].
Table 1
Common approaches to data augmentation by using generative modeling
Approach

Main function of
generative model

Classic models

Application scenario

Image synthesis

Generate new samples per
given categories

Deep Convolutional GAN (DCGAN)
(e.g., in [69])

Synthesize new samples
where no training data
exist

Image-to-image
translation

Reproduce specific
visual characteristics

Conditional GAN (CGAN) and
variants such as DiscoGAN [44]
and CycleGAN [45]

Image manipulation

Perform specific transformations
on input images

Spatial Transformer GAN
(ST-GAN) [70];
MOST-GAN [71]

Image Enhancement

Denoise images or improve quality
or photorealism of training data

Denoising GAN (DN-GAN) [72];
Super Resolution GAN (SRGAN) [43]

[91], colorization (i.e., conversion from grey-scale to color
images) [96] and dehazing [92] are common tasks that can
be accomplished with generative modeling.
4.2.4

Image quality enhancement

In some computer vision tasks, images available for training
deep learning models are often of low quality. One way
to improve performance is to enhance the quality of the
training data. For example, generative modeling is commonly used to clean noisy images (e.g., in [72]). Also, low
resolution images, can be qualitatively improved by using

Transfer desired visual
appearance to training
samples
Produce diversity in
training data to enhance
generalization
Improve the perceptual
quality of training
samples

super-resolution GANs such as Pix2Pix [40], SRGAN [43],
ESRGAN [97] or their derivatives. In a recent work [98],
Wang et al. used a modified Pix2Pix model as a superresolution GAN to increase the resolution of low-resolution,
microscopic images for training deep neural networks. They
first generated additional data using CycleGAN before employing the super-resolution GAN to improve the quality
of the training dataset. In many studies, generative models have been used to generate large, clean images from
noisy (e.g., [99], [100]) data, low resolution images (e.g.,
[101]), corrupted labels (e.g., [102] ) or images taken in

8

adverse weather conditions such as rainy weather [90]. Figure 9 shows the effectiveness of image enhancement techniques such as de-raining in improving the perceptual input
data. Generative modeling approaches that apply geometric
transforms on training samples have also been reported in
[103], [104], [105]. Some recent approaches are aimed at
enhancing the perceptual quality of CAD-generated models.
For example, RenderGAN [105] and DA-GAN [106] seek to
improve performance by refining simple, synthetically generated 3D models so as to endow them with photorealistic
appearance and desirable visual properties.
Images taken in a rany day: object De-rained images showing correctly
dectector unable to locallize objects predicted bounding boxes

Figure 9. Examples of using generative modeling approaches to augment data by enhancing perceptual quality, in this case – by de-raining.
The images by Zhang et al. [90] shows improvement in object detection
performance after de-raining input samples.

4.3 Common limitations of generative modeling techniques and possible workarounds
One of the main problems with generative modeling methods is that they require very large training data for good performance [107]. GANs are also susceptible to overfitting – a
situation where the discriminator memorizes all the training
inputs and no longer offer useful feedback for the generator
to improve performance. To address these problems of GAN
performance, a number of works [108], [109], [110] have
considered augmenting the data on which the generative
model is trained. These approaches have been shown to be
effective in alleviating small data and overfitting problems.
However, employing augmentation strategies can lead to
a situation where the generator reproduces samples from
the distribution of the augmented data which may not be
truly representative of the target task. Consistency regularization [111], [112] is a recent approach that has been
proposed to prevent augmented data from being strictly
reproduced by the generator. More advanced methods to
improve GAN generalization include techniques based on
perturbed convolutions [113] and Extreme Value Theory
[114]. For instance, to enable GANS to handle rare samples,
Bhatia et al. [115] proposed a probabilistic approach based

on Extreme Value Theory [114] that allows to generate realistic as well as out-of-distribution or extreme training samples
from a given distribution. In this context, extreme samples
are training examples that deviate significantly from those
present in the dataset. The approach also provides a way to
set degree of deviation and the likelihood of the occurrence
or proportion of these deviations in the generated data. Liu
et al [116] demonstrated that GAN may in some situations
fail to generate the task-required data (as a result of optimizing for a different task altogether) because GANs may
be optimizing for a different objective. Specifically, in [116]
a GAN designed for object detection tasks was shown to
(have) rather optimize for realism of generated images.
Like with all data synthesis methods, it is currently not
possible to directly compare different sets of synthetic data,
or even to determine the suitability of synthesized data
for a particular task without carrying out exhaustive tests.
The fundamental problem is the general lack of quality
metrics that can objectively evaluate the fitness of data for
a given task. While techniques like log-likelihood provides
a means to evaluate and assess the quality of VAEs, it is
currently difficult to extend these to objectively compare
the quality of GAN models. Some workarounds exist that
allow to roughly estimate the quality of generated samples
based on their similarity with the target data. This involves
comparing the statistics of the generated data to that of
the target data. The simplest metrics involve using more
traditional similarity measures such as nearest neighbors,
log-likelihoods [57], Minimum Mean Discrepancy (MMD)
[117] and Multi-scale Structural Similarity Index Measure
(MS-SSIM) [118]. Since these techniques merely estimate
pixel distribution, high scores on the metrics do not strictly
indicate high image quality. More advanced metrics allow
to quantitatively estimate data diversity (i.e., the degree
to which the synthetic data approximates the distribution
of the target data), quality (i.e., overall photorealism), and
other characteristics. The most important of these metrics
include Inception Score (IS) [119] and Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID) [120], as well as their new variants such
as Spatial FID [121], Unbiased FID [122], Memorizationinformed FID [123] and Class-aware FID [124]. These metrics allow to evaluate not only the general quality but also
important aspects such as bias and fairness of generative
models. Manual evaluation by visual inspection is another
common way to determine the quality of data [125], [126]
synthesized using generative modeling techniques. The approach relies on the developer’s domain knowledge to make
good judgment about the appropriateness of the training
data. In some cases, this may offer the best guarantee for
success. However, the approach is very subjective and prone
to biases of the human assessor. Moreover, because of the
limited capacity of human experts, the method cannot be
applied in settings that involve large-scale dataset.
A common class of problems with generative modeling techniques relates to training challenges. In particular,
generative models based on GANs suffer from unstable
training. One of the main causes of this issue is the socalled mode collapse problem [127]. This phenomenon occurs when the generator fails to learn the variety in input
data and is, thus, able to generate only a particular type of
data that consistently beats the discriminator but is inferior

9

in terms of diversity. Common solutions to this problem include weight Normalization [128] and other regularization
techniques [129] as well as architecture innovation [130].
Another serious problem with training generative models
is the non-convergence problem [131]. Researchers have attempted to address this difficulty by employing techniques
such as adaptive learning rates [132], [133], restart learning
[134] and evolutionary optimization of model parameters
[135]. These approaches alleviate the problem to an extent
but do not completely eliminate it.
Geometry processing

3D model

Fragment processing

& rasterization

Textures

Output
2D image

Illumination
model

tasks such as pose understanding, gesture and action recognition are immensely aided by 3D supervision. Techniques
based on CAD modeling can also simulate nonstandard
visual data such as point clouds (e.g., [139]), voxels (e.g.,
[140]), thermal images (e.g., [141]), or a combination of two
or more of these modalities (e.g., clouds [142]). State-of- theart computer graphics tools are able to produce fairly
realistic visual data for training machine learning models.
Three-dimensional game engines are particularly promising
in this regard, as they can simulate complex natural processes and generate near-realistic environments under different conditions using real physics models. This capability
provides an opportunity to train machine learning models
on complex real-world (natural) scenes. Examples of simple
3D objects from the Amazon Berkeley Objects (ABO) dataset
modeled using CAD tools are shown in Figure 11. Figure
12 shows realistic indoor scenes from the Hypersim [143]
dataset generated, also by CAD tools.

Figure 10. Simplified pipeline of the graphics modeling process.

5

C OMPUTER GRAPHICS MODELING

An increasingly promising line of works [136], [137], [138]
that aims to address the data scarcity problem exploit computer graphics tools to synthesize training data. Computer
graphics tools are capable of creating 2D and 3D objects as
well as whole complex scenes. The procedure for synthesizing data using computer-aided design (CAD) techniques
involves complex processes such modelling, rigging, texturing, and animating of the generated 3D objects. Game
engines provide more advance modeling capabilities that
can be used to create large, interactive scenes and virtual
environments that span whole cities.
5.1 Approaches to data synthesis based on computer
graphics modeling
In this subsection, we discuss the various graphics modeling
methods commonly used to generate synthetic to address
augmentation problems.
5.1.1
CAD modeling
The methods discussed in Section 4 typically tackle the data
augmentation problem as a 2D mapping of a particular
image domain to itself by using various transformations
to re- create variations of the original data in 2D space.
These 2D-based transformation approaches lack semantic
3D grounding, and are, thus, highly superficial in nature
and may not adequately represent the actual variations of
real-world scenes. Graphics modeling approaches address
this limitation by approaching data augmentation as a 3D to
2D mapping (i.e., a mapping from 3D physical world to 2D
pixel representation). One important area where computer
graphics models are increasingly used is in the area of 3D
perception. By modeling the underlying 3D processes of
image formation, simulation-based methods produce qualitatively better augmentations compared to pure 2D manipulation methods (for 3D vision). In particular, performance on

Figure 11. Sample objects from the Amazon Berkeley Objects (ABO)
dataset [144]. It is an example of dataset constructed using 3D CAD
models. The dataset consists of a large collection of artistically created
3D models of common household objects, and includes the necessary
metadata and physically-grounded properties.

CAD modeling methods represent basic scene information using geometric primitives such as triangles and
polygons along with their location information and camera
properties, global scene information. A renderer translates
this representation into a complete 3D scene. Rendering
is the process by which images are generated using these
basic geometric primitives and additional scene parameters
and textures. A typical rendering pipeline is a multi-stage
process that composes the primitive geometric entities and
scene parameters into more complex objects and scenes (Figure 10). The process involves sequentially creating higherlevel representations at every processing stage assembling
basic entities into more complex objects until whole scenes
are created. The basic elements are specified using analytical
formulas. A rendering engine translates the mathematical
formulas into their corresponding graphical representations
and compute various characteristics such as lighting, colors,
and shadows for display. In an OpenGL rendering pipeline,
for example, the rendering task consists of vertex shading
and assembly—processes that define coordinates posisitions
of objects and their attributes and their composition into
higher geometric shapes like polygons; geometry shading
and rasterization—i.e., converting the geometric informa-

10

Figure 12. Examples of photorealistic synthetic indoor scenes from the Hypersim [143] dataset.

tion into pixel form; fragment shading – for processing
color and texture information. Many advanced integrated
development environments (IDEs) have been developed to
facilitate 3D modeling. They provide advanced, intuitive
graphics user interface (GUI) and easy-to-use toolsets for
rendering and editing 3D models. Common 3D modeling
tools include simulation and 3D animation software tools
such as Cinema 4d, Blender, Maya and 3DMax. These tools
provide a means to obtain task-specific data in situations
where available data does not meed the requirements of the
target task. For instance, Hattori et al. [145] employ 3DMax
to synthesize data for human detection tasks in video
surveillance applications where task-specific data may not
readily be available. The approach allows the generated
data to be customized according to the specific requirements of a scene (e.g., scene geometry and object behavior)
and surveillance system (i.e., camera parameters). The tools
have also provided a means to create large-scale datasets
for generic applications. Examples of large-scale synthetic
datasets obtained from 3D CAD models include ShapeNet
[146], ModelNet [147] and SOMASet [148] datasets. Some
of the most important datasets created using 3D modeling
tools are described in Section 8.
5.1.2
Synthetic data from 3D physics (game) engines
While CAD tools are primarily used for creating 3D assets,
game engines provide tools to manipulate the generated
3D objects and scenes in nuanced ways within virtual
environments. They typically come with built-in rendering engines like Corona renderer, V-ray and mental ray.
Advanced game engines such as Unity3D, Unreal Engine,
and Cry Engine can simulate real-world phenomena such
as realistic weather conditions; fluid and particle behavior,
effects including diffuse lighting, shadows and reflections;
object appearance variations resulting from the prevailing
phenomena. By randomizing parameters associated with
these phenomena, sufficient data diversity can be achieved.
Besides visual perception, simulated environments based on
3D game engines can serve for a broad range of applications. They are particularly suitable for training models in
domains like planning, autonomous navigation, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), and control tasks.
Figures 13 and 15 show sample scenes from Carla [1] and
AirSim [149], [150], respectively. Both tools are created from
Unreal Engine. Figure 14 shows the different sensing modalities that can be obtained from Carla.
Because of the advanced manipulation capabilities of
modern game engines, recent synthetic data generation ap-

proaches [151] favor the use of 3D game engines, which are
capable of generating complete virtual worlds for not only
training neural network models, but also enabling interactive training of elements of worlds using deep reinforcement
learning frameworks. For instance, ML-agents introduced
in the Unity 3D game engine, provides a framework for
training intelligent agents in both 2D and 3D worlds using a
variety of machine learning techniques, including imitation
learning, evolutionary algorithms and reinforcement learning.

Figure 13. Varying appearance of a sample synthetic scene from
CARLA simulator [1] in different weather conditions.

Varol et al. [3] synthesized realistic datasets using Unreal
Engine. Their synthetic dataset, synthetic humans for real
tasks (SURREAL) has been provided as open-source dataset
for training deep learning models on different computer
vision tasks. The authors in [3] showed that for depth
estimation and semantic segmentation tasks, deep learning
models trained using synthetic data generated by 3D game
engines can generalize well to real datasets. Jaipuria et al.
[152] used Unreal Engine to enhance the appearance of
artificial data for lane detection and monocular depth estimation in autonomous vehicle navigation scenarios. As well
as generating scenes with photorealistic, real-world objects,
they also simulated diverse variability in the generated data:
viewpoints, cloudiness, shadow effects, ground marker defects and other irregularities. This diversity has been shown
to improve performance under a wider range of real-world
conditions. Bongini et al. [141] rendered synthetic thermal
objects using U3D’s thermal shader and superimposed them
in a scene captured using real thermal image sensors. They
additionally employ a GAN model to refine the visual

11

a

b

c

Figure 14. CARLA provides three sensing modalities: traditional vision (a), depth (b), and semantic segmentation (c).

appearance of the rendered images so that they look more
like natural thermal images.
Additional plugins have been developed to facilitate the
ease of generation of image data and corresponding labels
from game engines [153] or from virtual environments [153],
[154] developed on the basis of 3D engines. For instance,
Borkman et al. [153] introduced a Unity engine extension
known as Unity Perception that can be used to generate artificial data and the corresponding annotations for different
computer vision tasks, including pose estimation, semantic
segmentation, object detection and image classification. The
extension has been designed to synthesize data for both
2D and 3D tasks. Hart et al. [155] implemented a custom
OpenCV tool in Robot Operating System (ROS) environment to extract frames from simulated scenes in Gazebo
platform and generate their corresponding labels. Similarly,
Jang et al. [154] introduced CarFree, an open-source tool
to automate the process of generating synthetic data from
Carla. The utility is able to generate both 2D and 3D
bounding boxes for object detection tasks. It is also capable
of pixel-level annotations suitable for scene segmentation
applications. Carla [1] provides a python-based (API) for researchers and developers to interact with and control scene
elements. Mueller and Jutzi [156] utilized Gazebo simulator [157] to synthesize training images for pose regression
task. Kerim et al. [158] introduced the Silver framework, a
Unity game engine extension that provides highly flexible
approach to generating complex virtual environments. It
utilizes the built-in High Definition Render Pipeline (HDRP)
to enable control of camera parameters, randomization of
scene elements, as well as control of weather and time
effects.
5.1.3

Obtaining data directly from video games

Some recent works, for instance [159], [160], [161]), have
focused on directly extracting synthetic video frames from
scenes of video commercial games as image data for use
in training computer vision models.. To achieve this, appropriate algorithms are used to extract and label random
frames of video sequences by sampling RGB images at a
given frequency during game play. Since modern video
games are already photorealistic, the qualitative characteristics of image data obtained this way is adequate for
many computer vision tasks. Shafaei et al. [159] showed
that, for semantic segmentation tasks, models trained on
synthetic image data obtained directly through game play
can achieve comparable generalization accuracies as those
trained on real images. Further refinements by means of
domain adaptation techniques to bridge the inherent seman-

tic gap between real and synthetic images results in better
performance than models trained on real image datasets.
Since it is generally more challenging to obtain relevant
data for video object detection and tracking tasks than for
other computer vision applications, generating data from
video games has emerge as a promising workaround to
alleviate the challenge (e.g., in [161], [162], [163], [164]). The
main advantage of this approach is the possibility of utilizing off-the-shelf video games without strict requirements for
the resolution of the captured images. Its main disadvantage
is that video games contain general environments that are
not tailored for specific computer vision applications. Also,
the visual characteristics of images from game scenes may
not be optimized for computer vision tasks. Moreover, there
is generally a lack of flexibility in the data generation
process as the user can exercise very little control over
the scene appearance and cannot change scene behavior as
needed; since scenes in the video sequences are fixed, users
are not able to introduce factors of variability (e.g., arbitrary
backgrounds, objects and appearance effects) into the scene.
In contrast, approaches such as [158], [163], [165], [166] that
synthesize scenes from scratch using 3D physics engines
bypass these limitations, but require enormously long time
and are labor-intensive.
5.1.4
Obtaining synthetic 3D data through scanning of real
objects
Another technique [138] to alleviate the laborious work
required in synthesizing dense 3D data from scratch using
graphics modeling approaches is to leverage special tools
such as Microsoft Kinect to capture relevant details of the
target objects. This is accomplished by scanning different
views of the relevant objects at different resolutions and
constructing mesh models from these scans. With this approach, the desired low-level geometric representation can
be obtained without explicitly modeling the target objects.
In the simplest case, the 3D representation can be obtained
with depth cameras to capture multiple views of the object.
Suitable algorithms such as singular value decomposition
(SVD) [168], random sample consensus (RANSAC) [169]
and particle filtering [168] are then used to combine these
multiple images into a composite 3D model. The approach
proposed in [169], [170], [171] utilize RGBD cameras as
3D scanners for extracting relevant appearance information
from object. Figure 16 shows sample frames from the OpenRooms dataset [167], a dataset created from 3D-scanned
indoor scenes—ScanNet [172].
A common practice is to construct basic articulated 3D
models from the 3D scans which are further manipulated

12

Figure 15. Sample scenes from Microsoft AirSim [149], a synthetic virtual world for training unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and autonomous
ground vehicles. The views show typical urban environments for autonomous driving.

within 3D modeling environments to create variability. The
approach allows to incorporate only the relevant objects into
already modeled 3D scenes. The use of real 3D scans of
objects also helps to achieve physically-plausible representations of the relevant objects. Furthermore, visual effects such
as lighting, reflections and shadows cannot easily be manipulated by conventional 2D image transformation methods.
Therefore, these techniques are vital in situations where it is
necessary to train deep learning models to be invariant with
respect to these visual phenomena. For instance, Chogovadze et al. [173], specifically employ Blender-based light
probes to generate different illumination patterns to train
deep learning models robust to illumination variations. Vyas
et al. [169] employed a RGBD sensor to obtain 3D point
clouds and then used a RANSAC-based 3D registration
algorithm to construct the geometric representation from the
point cloud data. The authors obtained an accuracy of 91.2%
on pose estimation tasks when trained using the synthetic
dataset, albeit with some domain adaptation applied. It
must, however, be noted that this method can only be
used in situations where access to the target domain data
is possible.
5.1.5
Combining synthetic with real data
Because of the complex interaction of many physical variables which are difficult to capture using computer graphics
methods, some researchers suggest using synthetic data
simultaneously with real data. A few works suggest using
synthetic data only as a means for defining useful visual
attributes to guide the augmentation process. In [174], for
instance, Sevastopoulos et al. propose an approach where
synthetic data from a Unity-based simulated environment is
used as the first stage of data acquisition process to identify
useful visual attributes that can be exploited to maximize
performance in a given task before collecting real data. The
idea is to leverage synthetic data to provide initial direction
for further exploration so as to lower the cost of excessive
trial and error experimentation on real data. In Section 6,
we present quantitative results on the effectiveness of data
augmentation approaches that combine real and synthetic
data.

5.1.6
Integrating real and virtual worlds
As discussed earlier, the basic idea of the 3D object scanning
approach is to obtain information about target objects as
stand-alone data by extracting 3D information of real objects
and then utilizing graphics processing pipelines to perform
3D transformations on the skeletal models obtained by
scanning. However, in some cases (e.g., [175], [176]), 3D
geometry models of objects obtained by scanning the realworld objects are incorporated into more complex, taskrelevant 3D scenes created using graphics tools. Integrating
scanned objects into such virtual worlds provide effective
means to manipulate and randomize different factors so as
to simulate complex real-world behavior useful for model
generalization and robustness. Synthetic 3D models obtained in this manner can be used to train models on complex 3D visual recognition tasks such as object manipulation
and grapping. They can also be rendered as 2D pixel images
to augment image data. In some other cases (e.g., [177]), synthetic objects are immersed into real worlds in augmented
reality fashion. These real worlds are obtained from camera
images or videos. In [177], this approach was shown to
outperform techniques based on purely real or synthetic
data. The most important data augmentation approaches
based of computer graphics modeling are summarized in
Table 2.
5.2 Challenges of computer graphics-based synthesis
and workarounds
Despite the advanced rendering capabilities of modern 3D
modeling tools, the use of graphics modeling tools to synthesize training data has a number of limitations:
•

•

The synthesis of realistic data with high level of
detail and natural visual properties including realistic lighting, color and textures is a complex and
time-consuming process. This may limit the scope
of applications of 3D graphics modeling techniques
in data augmentation applications to only simple or
moderately complex settings.
Currently, in many situations, there is no objective
means of assessing the quality of artificially gener-

Scanned image
(ScanNet dataset)

a

b

Reconstructed image Different lighting

13

c
Different materials

d
Different views

Figure 16. Scanned indoor scenes from ScanNet are used to generate new synthetic 3D data based on the approach in [167]. The reconstructed
synthetic scenes (a) can then be rendered with different illumination levels and patterns (b), different materials (c), or different views (d).
Table 2
Summary of data augmentation approaches based on computer graphics modeling techniques
Approach

Description

Sample works

CAD modeling

Simulates 3D objects using geometric primitives

[146]

3D physics engines

Allows to generate and manipulate physically-plausible
3D objects in virtual environments

[3]

Data from gameplay

Generates pseudo-video data directly from video
games

[163]

Data from scanners

Produces synthetic 3D data through scanning
of real objects

[138]

Real-virtual world
integration

integrates scanned 3D objects with CAD or
physics engines

[175]

•

•

ated data. While some methods have been devised
to evaluate synthetic data, these are only applicable
in situations where reference images are available for
comparison. However, in many of the settings that
necessitate the use of graphics models, samples of
the target images are generally not available at the
model development and testing stages.
It is often difficult to know beforehand the desirable factors and visual features that are good for
performance. Moreover, synthetic data that appear
photorealistic to the human observer may not actually suitable for a deep learning model. For instance,
while high-fidelity synthetic samples have failed to
provide satisfactory performance in some situations,
some researchers (e.g., in [160], [178], [179] have obtained good performance using low-fidelity synthetic
images.
The generation process is usually accomplished by a
careful modeling process, and not from any natural
processes or sensor data obtained from real-world
variables. Even with the methods that generate synthetic data by scanning real objects, 3D alignment
techniques used for registration also introduce additional imperfections into the scene representation.
All these problems exacerbate domain gap problem
between real and synthetic data.

As a result of the above limitations, it is often challenging
to produce semantically meaningful synthetic environments

comparable to natural settings, especially when dealing
with complex scenes. Since simulated data obtained by 3D
modeling tools are often not perfect, the process of augmentation does not only consist in modeling visual scenes,
but also in correcting various imperfections and refining the
appearance of the artificially generated data to mitigate the
domain gap between synthetic and real data. Indeed, a large
number of so-called sim-to-real (sim2real) techniques [180],
[181], [182], [183] have been proposed for fine-tuning and
transferring synthetically generated graphics-based data to
real-world domains. The use of generative modeling techniques (e.g, [105], [184], [185]) as a means to endow simple
3D models with photorealistic appearance and desirable
visual characteristics has recently gained attention. These
approaches provide a more practical and cheaper means
for generating extra training data by leveraging unlabeled
image data and GANs to introduce hard-to-model, realworld visual effects to simple computer graphics images. In
[105] Sixt et al. proposed to learn augmentation parameters
to enhance the photorealism of synthetic 3D image data
using a large set of unlabeled, real-world image samples.
Dual-agent generative adversarial network (DAGAN) has
been proposed to enhance the photorealism of synthetic,
rudimentary facial data generated by 3D models [106].
Atapour and Breckon in [186] employ a CycleGAN model
to refine the appearance of synthetic data which resulted
in improved performance. Instead of employing GAN to
perform visual style transfer in order to refine synthetically

14

generated data, Huang and Ramanan in [187] propose to
produce a rather large volume of synthetic pedestrian data
and then select the most realistic poses through adversarial
training.
Rich geometric features inherent in synthetic data have
also been used to refine simple 2D images. An important class of refinement methods relies on image-to-image
translation models to transfer novel appearance and geometry information (e.g., new poses of objects, occlusion
patterns, etc.) from data sources where these views are
prevalent to new datasets. For instance, Liu et al. [82]
utilize a GAN model to increase the diversity of human
poses in a new dataset by transferring pose information
from the motion analysis and re-identification set (MARS)
dataset [188] where rich pose variation is present. In contrast, some approaches [189], [190] propose to explicitly
perform the necessary transformation analytically. Ma et
al . [190] employ a deep neural network architecture that
combines a GAN and a U-Net sub-models to generate new
training samples conditioned on person images and the
corresponding poses. The U-Net model reproduces new
images of the reference image in the desired poses by
explicitly utilizing the specified pose information. A GAN
model is then used to correct any artifacts that may result
and to refine the general appearance of the person in the
desired pose. Similarly, Chen et al. [189] employ explicit
warping operations to synthesize new shapes and poses
for pedestrian datasets. The concept of transferring realistic
views to more rudimentary visual data is extremely useful
in person or pedestrian detection [187], [191] and tracking
[80], [81], as well as person re-identification tasks [82], [83],
[84].
5.3

Augmentation for tasks not requiring realistic data

As noted in the preceding paragraphs, many recent image synthesis approaches focus on generating realistic data
for training machine learning models. This process is often tedius and sometimes requires expensive third-party
tolls to acomplish. However, in some cases –for example,
depth perception [192], optical flow [179] and ego-motion
estimation [193], disparity learning for binocular (stereo)
vision [194], [195] – the perceptual quality of images is
not important for visual understanding. Since the problem
of modeling 3D data with realistic geometry and appearance is often challenging, models designed to solve these
tasks can easily leverage easy-to-model, non-photorealistic
3D data synthesized with computer graphics tools. Shotton in [192] trained a machine learning model on nonphotorealistic 3D data to generate depth maps for human
posture recognition. The model produced good results when
trained on perceptually poor quality synthetic data alone.
Fischer [179] trained a deep learning model (FlowNet) on
the Flying Chairs dataset, a collection of unrealistic 3D
models of chairs, for optical flow. Ilg et al., observed in [196]
that the less realistic flying chairs dataset produces better
results in optical flow estimation than [194], which contains
more photorealistic 3D training data. The not-so-realistic
FlyingThings3D dataset [194] has also proven effective in
training deep learning models for optical flow and scene
flow tasks [193], [195].

6

N EURAL RENDERING

Another common way to synthesize new training data for
visual recognition tasks is by neural rendering. The aim of
neural rendering is to realize the scene rendering process using deep learning models. Unlike traditional scene rendering based on 3D graphical modeling, the neural rendering
process can be accomplished in both forward and backward
directions. In the forward direction, 2D images are generated from 3D scenes and additional scene parameters. In
the backward direction, the pixel image is translated into a
realistic 3D scene. The pipeline for this process is depicted
in Figure 17.
6.1

Differential neural rendering

Because the rendering process is inherently nondifferentiable, its incorporation in deep neural networks
is severely constrained. Differentiable rendering is an
approach to overcome this challenge by formulating the
scene modeling process as a differential problem that
can be seamlessly incorporated into deep neural network
pipelines and trained end-to-end. To achieve this, numerical
techniques have been proposed to find approximate
derivatives of rendering operations that can be used in
gradient-based algorithms such as backpropagation to
optimize scene parameters. Some earlier works such as
[198] and [199] embed real 3D graphics components as
renderers for the forward rendering, and accomplish
reverse rendering by modeling the relationship between
the output 2D image and the input scene parameters
using approximate analytical functions. An important
task in rendering is rasterization – i.e., converting scene
representation from continuous raster form into discrete
pixel values. Since the rasterization process is inherently
non-differentiable, many of the current approaches are
focused on developing approximating methods that can
handle this process in a differentiable way. Indeed, a large
number of differential neural rendering approaches usually
restrict the differentiation to rasterization process only.
Typically, the process involves estimating the gradients of
the rasterization process and using it in a back propagation
algorithm to optimize parameters for the rendering task.
Recent works [200], [201], [202] have focused on learning
many of the stages of the forward rendering process in an
end-to-end manner using deep learning techniques.The use
of deep neural network models in the rendering process
can help to generate more nuanced scene attributes (objects,
environments, realistic textures and noise) or refine existing
scene elements to improve the performance of computer
vision models when trained on synthetic data.
6.2

Scene representation methods

An important part of the neural rendering process is the
representation of scene elements: geometric priors and scene
parameters. We discuss the common approaches for scene
representation. The main strengths and weaknesses of these
approaches are summarized in Figure 18.
6.2.1
Explicit representation of scene primitives
Traditional computer graphics methods use explicit representations that leverage analytical functions to characterize

15

Model parameters

Output photo
Loss

Input photo
…
Networks

Geometry texture

DR

Pixel-wise loss

Global parameters
Camera

Perceptual loss

Light

Figure 17. Simplified pipeline of the neural rendering process [197]. Reverse rendering allows intermediate 3D scenes and associated scene
parameters to be generated from 2D images.
RepreSentation

Main StrengthS

WeakneSSeS

Point cloud

Low memory requirements

Low accuracy of scene topology information

voxel

More accurate with less processing, simplicity

High memory footprint

mesh

Provides more grounding (i.e., physics-aware scene representation)

High computational cost; Diﬃculty in describing
complex shapes

multimodal

High resolution, more robust to visual artifacts

More complex, high computational demand

Implicit (NN)

Naturally diﬀerentiable, low memory requirements

Lack of grounding

Hybrid (Explicit + NN)

Robustness, ﬂexibility and multipurpose

Complex architecture

Figure 18. A summary of the main advantages and disadvantages of geometric prior representation approaches used in differential neural rendering
pipelines. Here, the designation NN stands for neural network.

various visual attributes of scenes. In general, most neural
rendering methods use mesh representation to describe
geometric scene properties. In addition to these methods,
special techniques have also been developed to handle other
image modalities using voxels [203], [204], mesh [198] and
point cloud [205] data. Baek et al. [206] used the 3D mesh
renderer developed in [198] to synthesize 3D hand shapes
and poses from RGB images.
While approaches based on explicitly modeled geometric priors can leverage readily available 3D CAD models,
they are typically limited by imperfections in the underlying
models. Additional processing is usually needed to meet
the requirements of specific tasks. Thus, rendering methods
based on explicit representation pipelines can be adversely
impacted by scene capture process and modeling time. Besides, these approaches often require the use of proprietary
software tools at some stages of the development process,
making accurate scene representation difficult and costly to
obtain, and thereby limiting their scope of application. To
achieve competitive performance, highly detailed geometric primitives and accurate scene parameters are required,
along with sophisticated rendering methods. The process
of modeling these elements is therefore extremely tedious.
Because of these challenges, some works propose to deeply
learned to compose scene primitives rather than explicitly
modeling all elements from scratch

6.2.2

Implicit (neural) Representation

Unlike real 3D primitives whose construction is manual
and laborious, their pure neural counterparts are generated
automatically and can be constructed using less human
effort, albeit with long training schedules. However, their
ability to model 3D scene structure is directly dependent
on the representation power and capacity of the underlying
neural network.
To improve the effectiveness of approaches designed
using scene prior representation some works [204], [207],
[208] utilize deeply learned priors as auxiliary elements to
refine the accuracy of explicitly modeled priors. Thies et
al. [204], for instance, proposes to alleviate the burden of
rigorous modeling of textures by incorporating so-called
neural textures, a set of learned 2D convolutional feature
maps that are obtained from intermediate layers of deep
neural networks in the process of learning the scene capture
(process). The learned textures are then superimposed on
the geometric priors (i.e., 3D mesh) used for rendering. The
approach allows course and imperfect 3D models without
detailed texture information to leverage artificially generated textures to generate high-quality images. In [208],
point-based neural augmentation method is proposed to
enrich point cloud representations by leveraging learnable
neural representations. Similarly, Liu et al. in [204] propose
a hybrid geometry and appearance representation approach
based on so-called Neural Sparse Voxel Fields (NSVF). The

16

method combines explicit voxel representation with learned
voxel-bounded implicit fields to encode scene geometry and
appearance. While the above studies [204], [207], [208] employ learnable elements to refine scene primitives explicitly
constructed from scratch, some recent works [200], [201],
[202], [209], [210] have proposed to learn scene models – including geometry and appearance – entirely by using learnable elements. These representations are commonly learned
using 2D image supervision (as depicted in the reverse
rendering process of Figure 17). Most recent implicit neural
representations commonly use Neural Radiance Fields or
NeRFs [201], [209], [211], [211], an approach that employs
neural networks to learn a 3D function on a limited set of
2D images to synthesize high-quality images of unobserved
viewpoints and different scene conditions based on ray
tracing techniques.
Currently, the photorealism of scenes generated using
approaches based solely on learned representations have
not matched those generated using explicit and hybrid
representations. Duggal et al. [212] suggest that the problem
is as a result of a lack of robust geometric priors in neural
representation. They then propose an encoder sub-model to
initialize shape priors in latent space. In order to guarantee
that the synthesized shapes retain high-level characteristics
of their real-world counterparts, high-dimensional shape
priors realized with the aid of a discriminator sub-model.
This serves as a regularizer of the shape optimization process. More recently, implicit neural rendering techniques
have been used within generative modeling frameworks
based on VAEs [213], [214] and (GANs) [48], [49], [215] to
enable 3D-aware visual style transfer. These have improved
the results of data synthesis achievable with either neural
rendering or generative modeling techniques alone. For
neural rendered scenes, the use of generative modeling
helps to easily adapt visual contexts as needed. On the other
hand, while generative modeling methods alone have been
used to successfully model 3D scene, they often lack true
3D interpretation sufficient for complex 3D visual reasoning
tasks [216].
6.3 Approaches and use-cases of neural rendering in
data augmentation
For the purpose of data augmentation, there are three broad
scenarios in which neural rendering is commonly applied:
•
•

•

2D to 2D synthesis – situations where one synthesizes additional pixel (2D) data using 2D supervision
Scene reconstruction (2D to 3D)–3D visual understanding tasks where 3D dataset is inaccessible, and
it is required to synthesize 3D objects or scenes using
available 2D image data
3D to 2D synthesis–tasks where 2D images are generated from 3D assets

6.3.1
2D to 2D synthesis
A straight-forward application of the data synthesis architecture presented in Figure 17 is to generate new 2D image
data with desired visual attributes from a given 2D input
image. In this case, the task of the neural rendering process
is to apply appropriate transformations in the intermediate

3D representation before the final rendering stage to generate desired 2D output. The basic idea is to disentangle
pertinent factors of image variation such as pose, texture,
color and shape. These can then be manipulated in an
intermediate 3D space before mapping into a 2D space
during the rendering process. Such an approach facilitates
a more semantically meaningful manipulation of various
scene elements and visual attributes. In data augmentation,
this may be necessary when synthesizing different poses of
objects in a scene [222] or when generating novel views from
a single image sample (e.g., in [223]) or when introducing
lighting effects to global scene appearance in order to encode invariance to these variations. These transformations
are usually difficult to realize accurately with 2D operations
that lack the 3D processing stage.
6.3.2
2D to 3D synthesis (scene reconstruction)
Another important application of differentiable rendering
related to data augmentation is in scene reconstruction,
i.e., the conversion from 2D image to 3D scene. Scene
reconstruction techniques typically rely on inverse graphics
principles. In this case, a 2D image is used to recover the
underlying 3D scene. Important scene parameters such as
scene geometry, lighting, camera parameters, as well as object properties such as position, shape, texture and materials
are also estimated in the reconstruction process. This is
useful in applications that require 3D visual understanding capabilities. Examples of such applications include for
high-level cognitive machine vision tasks such as semantic
scene understanding, dexterous control and autonomous
navigation in unstructured environments. Tancik et al. [202]
recently proposed Block-NeRF, a technique to enable the
synthesis of large-scale environments (see Figure 21) . They
addressed current limitations of NeRF-based models by
dividing the scene representation into distinct blocks that
can be rendered independently in parallel and combined to
form a holistic contiguous virtual environment for training
machine learning models on navigation tasks. These appearance modifications can also be applied in a blockwise
manner, where smaller regions corresponding to individual
NeRFs are updated separately.
Scene reconstruction methods have also been widely
used to improve the quality of medical image capture in application like MIR (e.g., [224], [225] and CT (e.g., [226], [227],
[228], [229], [230]). For instance, the works in [226], [227],
[228] propose using implicit representations to increase the
resolution of otherwise sparse CT images. Gupta et al. [229]
employ NIR in an image reconstruction model, known as
NeuralCT, to compensate for motion artifacts in CT images.
Their approach does not require an explicit motion model to
handle discrepancies resulting from patient motion during
the capture process.
6.3.3
3D to 2D synthesis
Pixel image synthesis from 3D scene is a reverse process of
scene reconstruction. It is aimed at learning the 3D scene and
mapping it to a 2D space with the help of neural rendering
techniques. The idea is to utilize 3D models designed by
traditional graphics tools or game engines to generate 2D
pixel images. The process is quite simple: given a set of
primitive 3D geometric priors and corresponding scene

17

A
N

CNN
renderer

1

Image pixel features

GAN, VGG, L1, L2

GAN

Style encoder
SPADE

Voxel world
feature voxel corner
Segmentation GAN model
map

Pseudo-ground-truth Real image

B

Figure 19. A: General architecture of GANcraft [217],a NeRF framework for generating realistic 3D scenes from semantically-labeled Minecraft block
worlds without ground truth images. It employs SPADE, a conditional GAN framework proposed by Park et al. in [218] to synthesize pseudo-ground
truth images for training the proposed NeRF model. B: Sample Minecraft block inputs (insets) and corresponding photorealistic scenes generated
by the model. .

a

b

c

d

e

elements such as 3D geometry (e.g., vertices of volumetric
objects), color, lighting, materials, camera properties and
motion to faithfully synthesize unobserved pixels images.
Variability in the synthesized images is achieved by manipulating individual factors that contribute to the scene
structure (geometry) and appearance (photometry). Thus,
the process provides a way to control specific objects in the
scene (e.g., modify object scale, pose or appearance) as well
as general scene properties. This can help to incorporate
more physically-plausible semantic features into synthesize
than with traditional image synthesis approaches that lack
3D grounding.
6.4 Limitations of neural rendering methods and possible workarounds

Figure 20. Visual comparison of scenes generated by different GANs
and NeRF models. Each of the rows represents a unique scene, while
the scenes in different columns correspond to different style-conditioning
images. The specific models used here are: (a) MUNIT [219], (b)
SPADE [218], (c) wc-vid2vid [220], (d) NSVF-W [221], and (e) GANcraft
[217].Images are taken from [217]. .

parameters, the task is to obtain a 2D pixel image. The 3D
to 2D subtask can be seen within the differential diagram in
Figure 17. Unlike the 2D to 2D synthesis methods discussed
earlier that require pixel images to synthesize training data,
3D to 2D synthesis methods directly generate 2D images
from 3D assets.
A common application of differential rendering is to
employ deep neural network models to generate 2D images and to provide flexibility in applying various 3Dlike transformations in synthetically generated 2D image
data. For instance, differential renderers can utilize scene

Neural rendering approaches allow to bypass the tedious
and laborious process of manually constructing computer
graphics models of real world objects. They provide automated way for modeling complex physical processes and
scenes. State-of-the-art differential neural rendering techniques make it possible to predict the spatial structure of a
complex scene pixel images. They can be used to restore 3D
information for a particular 2D image. Modern approaches
based on NeRF models such as PixelNeRF [211], DS-NeRF
[231] and IBRNet [232] can even generate diverse scenes
in various lighting conditions and poses from just a few
or a single RGB image. However, training such models
requires enormously large quantities of task-relevant data.
These approaches generalize poorly to unseen data. Since, in
many practical settings, labeled datasets for these tasks may
be extremely challenging to produce, many works [207],
[208], [233], [234] incorporate traditional graphics pipelines
into end-to-end deep neural networks to view-consistent

18

a

June

Sept.

Block-NeRF
1 km

b

Figure 21. State-of-the-art neural rendering models such as Block-NeRF [202] allow large 3D environments to be generated from sparse 2D views.
In multiple neural radiance field models combine to encode large. Shown here is an approximately one square kilometer environment rendered by
Block-NeRF (a). The authors also provide a way to alter the appearance of the rendered scene corresponding different environmental conditions
such as weather and illumination changes (b). .

scenes. Generative modeling techniques [47], [215], [217]
have also been suggested as a viable means for providing
the necessary supervision in the absence of ground-truth
images. Hao et al. in [217], for instance, propose a neural
rendering model that allows to generate realistic scenes from
simple 3D LEGO-like block worlds like Minecraft. Since
there are no ground-truth images for these types of inputs
that can be used to supervise the training, the authors utilize a pretrained GAN-generated images as pseudo-ground
truth instead of real images. Their approach, like [202], also
allows flexible user control over both scene appearance and
semantic content using appearance codes. This capability is
useful for applications like long term visual tracking [235],
where scene dynamics impacts severely on performance; the
ability to control scene appearance is extremely important to
simulate all possible view conditions. The basic structure of
GANcraft and sample outputs are shown in Figure 19. In
Figure 20 we present a visual comparison of scenes generated by different GANs (MUNIT [219], (SPADE [218] and
wc-vid2vid [220]), NeRF (NSVF-W [221]) and a combination
of GAN and NeRF (GANcraft [217]).
An important aspect of data synthesis based on neural
rendering approaches is the ability to work with different data representations – for example, voxels, raw point
clouds, pixels, or implicitly defined data forms based on
learned functional description of the physical properties of
objects. However, this flexibility also presents difficulties:
representations can be very different for the same data and
the different forms of representations are not necessarily
compatible with one another. Recent techniques [236], [237],
[238], [239] allow to fuse or convert between these diverse
data representations. However, these methods often lead to
the loss of vital information about the scene elements. As a
result of these difficulties, training neural rendering models
to generate data in these modalities is still a challenging
issue. Moreover, relatively small number of datasets exist for

training differential neural rendering models on many of the
possible representation modalities. Given the rapid growth
of interests in neural rendering methods, this problem will
be solved in the short term.
Implicit neural representation can also support nonstandard imaging modalities such as synthetic aperture
sonar (SAS) images [240], [241], computed tomography
(CT) [230], [242], [243] and intensity diffraction tomography (IDT) [244]. In addition, these approaches are capable of modeling non-visual information like audio signals
[245]. Approaches have also been proposed to leverage
multiple visual modalities together with other physical
signals to provide complementary information about the
physical properties of objects [245], [246], [247]. This can
support multi-sensory intelligence in applications such as
robotics, virtual, augmented, extended and mixed reality,
and human-computer interaction. However, adding these
additional elements means that data requirements grow
even more exponentially, making it challenging to accomplish realistic results based on only learnt models. Many
works (e.g., [248], [249], [250]) propose integrating taskspecific priors to improve the ability of neural rendering
methods that model complex scenes and interactions to
generalize better to unseen contexts. Incorporating strong
priors often requires special mathematical formulations
within neural network models for encoding spatial features
and natural behavior of objects in the 3D world, leading
to increased computational complexity and cost. For this
reasons, state-of-the-art neural rendering frameworks such
as [248], [250], [251]) are inherently complex, limiting their
ability to represent large-scale scenes. Block-NeRF [202]
proposes a modular framework that allows separate NeRF
modules to represent individual regions of a scene (shown
in Figure 21). This allows large-scale 3D scenes to be represented and efficiently manipulated using sparse 2D images.

19

7

N EURAL STYLE TRANSFER

Neural style transfer (NST) is a method for synthesizing
novel images similar to GAN-based style transfer. However,
in contrast with generative modeling approaches, neural
style transfer exploit conventional feed forward convolutional neural networks for the synthesis.
7.1

Principles of neural style transfer

Neural style transfer involves first learning representations
for the content and structure of the original images, and
the style of a reference samples. These representations are
then combined to generate new representations in the style
of the reference images while at the same time maintaining
the content and structure of the original image. The method
leverages the hierarchical representation mechanism of deep
convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) to flexibly generate novel images with various appearance artifacts and
styles. An illustration of the basic principles of the concept
is shown in Figure 22. Since shallower layers in CNNs
encode low-level visual features such as object texture,
lines and edges [252], while deeper layers learn high-level
semantic attributes, different augmentation schemes can be
realized by manipulating the two semantic levels separately
and combining them in different ways. In NST, typically,
a DCNN model without the fully connected layers are
used to extract image features at different levels. Low level
features encoded by shallower layers are then extracted
and combined with high-level features extracted from a
second image. As the second image contributes high-level
features, essentially, its semantic content is transferred to
the artificially generated image while the first image’s visual
style is transferred (see Figures 22 and 23).
The original technique for neural style transfer) was first
proposed by Gatys et al. in [254] as a way to artificially
create different artistic styles in images. Specifically, they
altered landscape images taken by digital camera to look
like images produced by artworks while still maintaining
Style
Reconstructions

Style
Repreentations

Input image

Content
Representations

Convolutional Neural Network

Content
Reconstructions

Figure 22. Neural style transfer relies on the hierarchical representation
of features in convolutional neural networks to render high-level semantic content of images in different visual styles. In the original work [253]
Gatys propose to extract style and content information from different
processing stages of convolutional neural networks. The extracted style
and content information are then manipulated separately and combined
to form new images.

their semantic meaning. To accomplish this, Gatys et al.
[254] remove the fully connected layers of a VGG model
[255] and use the convolutional layers to extract visual
features at different semantic levels. They then introduce
an optimization function that consists of two different loss
components – the style and content loss functions – which
are controlled separately by different sets of weight parameters. Based on these principles, the authors showed
that image content and style information can be transferred
independently to different visual contexts by separating the
filter responses of shallower and deeper layers of the CNN
model. To create a new image with the content of a source
image Ic and the style of a target image Is, they propose to
combine the latter processing stages of Ic with the earlier
stages of Is (Figure 22). Neural style transfer has also been
extended to video [?], [256], [257], [258] and 3D computer
vision [259] applications. Ruder et al. [259] propose an video
style transfer technique that applies a reference style from a
single image to an entire set of frames in a video sequence.
In [260], a neural style transfer approach is combined with
a GAN model to generate diverse 3D images from 2D
views. The generated image data is then used to improve
performance 3D recognition tasks.

7.2 Neural style transfer as a data augmentation technique
Following the original work [254], many subsequent studies
(e.g., [260], [261], [262], [263], [264], [265], [266], [267], [268])
have employed neural style transfer technique as a form of
data augmentation strategy to synthesize novel images to
extend training data. In many of the works, including the
original work that introduced the approach, style transfer is
typically applied to synthesize non-photorealistic images. It
is reasonable to assume that adding images that are stylized
in a non-photorealistic way to the training dataset could
still help to reduce overfitting and improve generalization
performance. Indeed, a number works have shown this to
be the case for many tasks. Jackson et al. [269] demonstrated
that augmenting training data nonphotorealistic images
(e.g., images synthesized in artistic styles)can significantly
improve performance in several different computer vision
tasks. Using neural style transfer, Jackson et al. in [269]
achieved an improvement in the range of 11.8 to 41.4% over
a baseline model (InceptionV3 without augmentation) and
improvement between 5.1 and 16.2% over color jitter (alone)
on cross-domain image classification tasks. In addition, their
method yields a performance increase of at least 1.4% over
a combination of seven different classical augmentation
types. Instead of transferring a single style per image, the
authors in [269] aim to create more random styles suitable
for multi-domain classification tasks by randomizing image
features (texture, color and contrast). They used a so-called
style transfer network to obtain random style attributes by
sampling from multivariate distribution of low-level style
embeddings.

20

Style image

Content image

Inputs
Style image

Stylized outputs for diﬀerent models
Content image

(a)

(b)

(c)

Output image

Figure 25. Visual comparison of different NST-based photorealistic stylization methods. We show results for Li et al. [274] (column a), Luan et
al. [275] (column b) and Yang [276] (column c).
Figure 23. An example of artistic style transfer by neural style transfer
(NST) technique (image courtesy [270]). The NST model reproduces
the content of the content image in the style of the style image.

Input samples
Content image Style image

Styled outputs using different models

a

b

c

d

Figure 24. Comparison of results of different artistic style transfer approaches: Gatys et al. [253] (a), Huang and Belongie [271] (b), Kim et
al. [272] (c) and Liu et al. [273] (d).

7.3

Approaches to data augmentation using NST

In the literature, three main approaches to data augmentation based on neural style transfer can be distinguished.
These are (1) approaches aimed at increasing data variability in order to improve generalization performance, (2)
approaches aimed at synthesizing photorealistic image data,
and (3) approaches that seek to selectively modify only the
most important (in a given context) image parts. We briefly
discuss these three neural style transfer implementations in
subsections 7.3.1 to 7.3.3. In Table 3, we present a summary
of the main features of these approaches.

7.3.1

Inproving data diversity with artistic stylization

Since higher data diversity generally favor better generalization accuracy, many works [281], [285], [286], [287] have
recognized the importance of increasing diversity of styled
images and have introduced different techniques to achieve
this. Wang et al. [281] propose an approach that relies on
the perturbation of deep convolutional features by means of
random noise injection. Another class of approaches [263],
[280], [288], [289] aim to address this problem by developing
methods that allow many different styles to be transferred
simultaneously. For instance, in [280], sets of convolution
feature maps in intermediate CNN layers are grouped into
filter banks, with each group uniquely encoding one specific
style (see Figure 27). Dumoulin et al. [289] propose a simple normalization approach – named conditional instance
normalization – that leverages the mean-variance statistics
of convolutional features to enable as many as 32 different
styles to be transferred to a specified content image. Instead
of explicitly extracting style information from reference
images, Georgievski [263] proposes an approach in which
different styles can be independently specified as input
style embeddings. First, a large set of generic style embeddings are first obtained from a pre-trained neural network
(Inception-ResNet-V2) that is trained on large-scale image
dataset (in this case, ImageNet). The learned styles are then
used to construct a multivariate normal distribution of styles
that can later be applied to content images. The application
of styles is accomplished through an encoder-decoder subnetwork, which the author termed style transformer. Huang
and Belongie [271] extend the concept of [289] by modifying
the instance normalization operation in such a way that it is
able to encode arbitrary style, as opposed to transferring a
pre-defined set of style as in [289]. They introduced a new
layer, adaptive instance normalisation (AdaIN), in place the
conditional instance normalization layer in [CIN]) whose
function is to align the mean and variance of convolutional
features of style and content images. Gu et al. [288] propose
to reshuffle deep feature maps of the style image so as to
synthesize images with arbitrary styles. Data augmentation
schemes based on such stylizations would result in more ro-

21

Table 3
The main ways to perform data augmentation using neural style transfer technique
Approach

Rationale for data augmentation

Artistic style transfer
Photorealistic style transfer
Multi-style transfer
Patch-level stylization

Input image

a

Sample works

Simulates noise to provide variability in training data so as to decouple models
from being tied to specific visual features. It can also help encode invariance to
image textures.
Simulates desired real-world visual effects such as illumination and weather
effects in training data.
Increase the diversity of training images to improve generalization
performance
Provides a means to manipulate specific image content (e.g.,
objects of interest in object detection task)

NST
(single style image)

NST
(multiple style images)

b

c

CycleGAN

d

[261], [263], [269]
[277], [278], [279]
[280], [281]
[267], [282], [283]

CycleGAN
(with identity loss)

e

CartoonGAN

f

Figure 26. Qualitative comparison of neural style transfer (NST) and GAN models (results courtesy [284]). The different models aim to perform
artistic stylization of the original images while maintaining all content. The styles were obtained from images extracted from cartoon videos. The
NST model in column b has been trained on style image that has similar content as the input image (shown inset). The rest of the columns (c, d,
e and f) show results of styling with an aggregate of 4,573 cartoon images. Note that the quality of stylization is defined by how well the semantic
content is preserved, including the clarity of edges. The specific models used are: NST by Gatys et al. [253] (column b and c), CycleGAN [45]
(column d), CycleGAN with identity loss (column e), and CartoonGAN [284] (column f).

bust representations akin to style randomization in rendered
images.
In addition to these approaches that aim to improve
image synthesis by introducing new architectural methods
of encoding styles within CNN layers, a number of works
[290], [291] are primarily focused on developing new loss
functions that allows to better transfer more diverse and
fine-grained features than earlier approaches based on style
and content loss functions [254]. Li et al. in [285] introduced
a special loss function, known as diversity loss, to encourage diversity. Wang et al. Luan et al. [275] propose a loss
function based on smoothness estimation.
7.3.2
Photorealistic data syntheis with NST
Recently, several researchers [275], [292], [292] have introduced methods to enhance the photorealism of images
synthesized using NST methods. Photorealistic styles are
stylization schemes that render the resulting image as visually close as possible to real images captured by real
image sensors. Photorealism is aimed at simulating highquality data in terms of image details and textures, taking into consideration a range of real-world factors, which
may include blurring effects resulting from camera motion,
random noise, distortions and varying lighting conditions.
Figure 24 compares the results of different artistic style
transfer approaches. In Figure 25, the outputs of various
models that aim to achieve photorealistic stylization are
compared. We also compare the artistic style transfer ability
of common GAN models with NST methods in Figure 26.

There is also a family of NST approaches that aim to
transfer specific visual attributes such as image color [286],
[293], [294], illumination settings [295], material properties
[296] or texture [297], [298]. Rodriguez-Pardo and Garces in
[296] propose a NST-based data augmentation scheme based
on transferring properties of images under varying conditions of illumination and geometric image distortions. Gatys
et al. in [299] propose to decompose style into different
perceptual factors such as geometry, color and illumination
which can then be combined in different permutations to
synthesize image with specific, desirable attributes. In order
to avoid geometric distortions and preserve statistical properties of convolutional features extracted from style images,
Yoo et al. [292] introduced a wavelet corrected transfer
mechanism that replaces standard pooling operations with
wavelet pooling units.
Neural style transfer techniques have also been successfully employed to transfer specific semantic visual contexts
to synthetic data. For instance, Li et al. [277] transferred
images taken in clear weather to snowy conditions. In [253],
images taken in bright day are converted to night images using NST stylization techniques. More advanced neural stylization approaches [278], [279] have been designed
to learn the semantic appearance as well as physicallyplausible behavior of objects of interest. Kim et al. [278],
for instance, proposed a physics-based Neural Style Transfer
method to simulate particle and fluid behavior in synthetic
images. Their approach allows realistic visual appearance
and semantic content of different particular matter to be

22

Figure 27. StyleBank [280] is an example of multi-style transfer technique based on an encoder-decoder architecture. It encodes different styles in
groups of convolutional filters in intermediate CNN layers that can be selectively applied to specific image content.

learned and transferred from 2D to 3D settings.
7.3.3
Patch-level synthesis
Researchers have also proposed photorealistic synthesis
methods [296] based on patch-wise stylization that allow
specific image parts or object within images to be selectively
altered. Such methods allow a more granular control of the
output images. They may enable, for instance, the manipulation of specific objects in a complex scene. This family of
style transfer techniques can be useful in applications such
as semantic segmentation (e.g., in [282]. Some works have
suggested using patch-level styling to achieve photorealism
while at the same time reducing the computational demands of conventional (holistic image) methods. Cygert and
Czyżewski [267] argue that styling the whole input image
could be detrimental to generalization performance. They
propose to address this limitation by utilizaing a stylization
method that transforms only small patches of input images.
To achieve this, they perform a hyperparameter search to
find the best patch size for stylization. In [283], Chen et al.
proposed a patch-based stylization technique as a means of
reducing complexity and improving memory efficiency in
the stylization of high resolution images.
7.4 Limitations
workarounds

of

NST

methods

and

possible

The main advantage of neural style transfer is the fact
that the approach leverages the natural representation of
visual features in CNN layers to synthesize new image data.
Consequently, the amount of data and the time required for
training models is relatively small. Also, model architectures
for neural style transfer are generally simpler compared to
other synthesis methods such as generative modeling and
neural rendering. Moreover, since NST training is usually
more sample-efficient than other synthesis methods, memory requirement is greatly reduced.
One major weakness of datasets created by neural style
transfer approaches is that the data is generated by featurelevel manipulations and not by intuitive transformation of
real data. As a result, it is extremely difficult to account
for semantic information about the entities in a scene when
applying stylization. This can also lead to noise and unwanted artifacts which may seriously affect the quality of
the generated data. Another challenge with non-intuitive,
feature level perturbations is the difficulty in maintaining
consistency between local and global features [275] when
applying styles. These issues require additional (costly) processing of semantic information so as to ensure that realistic

data is produced. For instance, recent works have proposed
to optionally perform semantic segmentation on the target
scene so as to enable context-specific style transfer (e.g.,
in [275], [300]). This additional processing step may lead
to increased model complexity and computational cost. In
addition, it can potentially introduce errors, e.g., a result of
incorrect segmentation masks, which may harm the accuracy of the stylization.
Also, the fact that the generated dataset is not derived
from intuitive, physically grounded manipulation of input
data at the sample level may limit the degree to which
desired visual attributes can be simulated. Unlike neural
rendering and generative modeling techniques that can
naturally learn desired visual contexts such as color, contrast
and illumination levels, neural style transfer methods require more complex formulations to handle these attributes
successfully.
An even more serious limitation of neural style transfer
methods is the difficulty of simulating spatial transformations. For this reason, the approach is mainly used for photometric data augmentation tasks. Furthermore, geometryconsistent photometric stylizations (e.g., brightness levels
based on viewpoints; generating and placing shadows at
the right positions in a scene; and fine-grained style-content
consistency under different poses) are difficult to achieve.
This can lead to distorted style patterns. The difficulty lies
in the inherent principle of the approach: different hierarchical levels of feature maps separately capture style and
geometry information and are combined to generate new
samples. The decoupling of style from geometry makes it
challenging to apply learned styles in a view-dependent
manner. Some works (e.g., [273], [301]) have proposed to
incorporate explicit spatial deformation models within NST
architectures to handle geometric transformations. In [302]
Jing et al. utilize graph neural network model to learn finegrained style-content correspondences that minimizes local
style distortions under geometric transformations.

8

S YNTHETIC DATASETS

Presently, a wide range of large-scale synthetic datasets are
publicly available for training and evaluating machine vision models. We summarized the details of some of the most
important synthetic datasets in Table 4. These datasets support a wide range of visual recognition tasks. In addition,
they cover many of the synthesis methods explored in this
work. In addition, they include the common representation
methods.

23

Table 4
A summary of publicly-available synthetic datasets
Dataset

Synthesis method

Domain

Supported tasks
View Synthesis
Scene reconstruction
Pose estimation

Dataset size

RTMV [303]

Neural rendering

General scene understanding

300,000

MPI-Sintel [161]

3D animation (video)

Spatio-temporal scene understanding Optical flow

1628

Objectron [304]

3D data from augmented
reality library

Multi-view object recognition

3D object detection

4M

Synthia [164]

3D game engine

Autonomous driving

Depth estimation
Scene segmentation
Ego-motion

200,000

LCrowd [166]

3D game engine

Crowd analysis

Crowd counting
Person detection (in crowd)

20M

Semantic3D [305]

Point cloud data
from laser scanner

urban scene understanding

Semantic segmentation

Synscapes [165]

Neural rendering

Autonomous driving

Pose estimation
Depth estimation
Semantic and instance
segmentation

25,000

ShapeNet [146]

3D CAD

General recognition

3D Perception

51,300

ScanNet [172]

RGB-D capture

Indoor scene understanding

Semantic and instance
segmentation

2.5M

Virtual Kitti [162]

3D game engine

Urban scene understanding

Depth estimation
Optical flow
Object detection and tracking
Scene and instance
segmentation

21,260

Pix3D [306]

3D scanning and
web sources

Object shape retrieval
viewpoint estimation

2D-to-3D reconstruction

395

GTA-V [160]

Video game play

Autonomous driving

Sematic Segmentation

25,000
77,400

Hypersim [143]

3D CAD

Indoor scene understanding

Semantic and instance
segmentation

PreSIL [307]

Video game play

3D scene understanding

2D and 3D object detection
Depth perception
Semantic segmentation

50,000

SOMASet [148]

3D CAD

Person re-identification

Object recognition

100,000

Indoor scene understanding

Object detection
Pose estimation
Depth estimation
segmentation

5M

SceneNetRGBD [308]

9

RGB-D rendered objects
from CAD models

E FFECTIVENESS OF SYNTHETIC DATA AUGMEN -

TATION METHODS

Many works have demonstrated the effectiveness of synthetic data augmentation techniques. In some cases (e.g.,
[3], [4], [184], [309]) data generated synthetically leads to
better generalization performance than real data. Wang et al.
[309], for example, reported several instances where models
trained on synthetic data achieve better results on face
recognition tasks. Similarly, Rogez and Schmid [4] consistently obtained higher performance with synthetic data than
with real data on pose estimation tasks. Applications scenarios where synthetic images have particularly performed better than real data have been settings that do not require high
level of photorealism (e.g., depth perception [3]) and pose
estimation [4], [184]. This is due to the fact that synthetic
images are often “cleaner” (i.e., the do not contain spurious
details and artefacts which may be irrelevant to the target
task). While some studies have obtained impressive results
with training exclusively on synthetic data, many other
works show that synthetic data, when used alone, would
not always yield the desired performance. For instance,
results obtained by Richter et al. in [160] demonstrates that
while synthetic data can drastically reduce the amount of
real training data needed to achieve optimum performance,

by themselves synthetic images do not guarantee good
performance. In their study [160], they experimented first
with real data and obtained an mean IoU of 65.0%. When
the training set was augmented with synthetic data, they
were able to improve the mean IoU score by 3.9% (from 65.0
to 68.9%). Indeed, using the augmented data, they achieved
comparable performance (65.2%) as with real data (65.0%)
using only about one-third of the real data. However, the
results were poor and unsatisfactory when only synthetic
data was used (43.6%). Rajpura and Bojinov [310] compared
the performance of deep learning-based object detectors
trained on synthetic (3D-grahics models), real (RGB images),
and hybrid (synthetic and real) data. The results showed
lower performance on synthetic data (24 mAP) compared to
real (28 mAP). However, the addition of the real and synthetic images improves the performance by up to 12% (36
mAP). Similarly, in [177] Alhajia et al. observed that training
with augmented reality environment that integrates real and
synthetically generated objects into a single environment
achieves a significantly higher performance than with either
separately. In [311], Zhang et al. observed that expanding
the training set by increasing the proportion of synthetic
data does not lead to a linear increase in model performance.
In fact, for some tasks, the performance flattens out at about

24

25% composition of synthetic data for the specific cases
investigated.

10

S UMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In the literature, many data synthesis approaches have
been proposed. Despite the large variety of techniques, four
main classes of approaches can be distinguished: generative
modeling, data synthesis by means of computer graphics
tools, neural rendering approaches that utilize deep learning models to simulate 3D modeling process, and neural
style transfer that relies on combining different hierarchical
levels of convolutional features to synthesizer new image
data. The first group of approaches – generative modeling
– is mainly based on the generative adversarial networks
and variational autoencoders. Generative modeling methods allow realistic image data to be synthesized using
only random noise as input. Models can also generate
outputs conditioned on specific input characteristics that
define the desired appearance of target data. The second
class of methods, computer graphics approaches explicitly
construct 3D models based on manually modeled, primitive
geometric elements. Neural rendering methods use deep
neural networks to learn the representation of 3D objects
and then optionally render these as 2D images. Neural style
transfer combines different semantic information contained
in different layers of neural networks to synthesis various
visual styles. The main strengths and weaknesses of each of
these classes of approaches are summarized in Figure 28.
The different data synthesis approaches have unique
characteristics that define their scope of application. Neural style transfer method, for example, is highly flexible
since the stylization process can be controlled by setting
appropriate weight parameters corresponding to different
style intensities. This allows low-level transformations to be
easily accomplished for a given task. However, despite its
simplicity and relative efficiency, the method is generally
limited to 2D synthesis. It is also challenging to generate
large-scale photorealistic data. Its most important prospect
is in enhancing robustness to noise, overcoming overfitting by preventing models from learning specific visual
patterns, and encouraging texture invariance. Unlike neural style transfer methods, rapid advances in generative
modeling techniques have made it possible to easily create
large volumes of artificial images with desired properties
for specific tasks. However, these methods typically model
objects and scenes in 2D, making it difficult to to transfer
encoded knowledge to 3D scene understanding tasks. Also,
by ignoring the 3D structure of the real world, achieving
physically-grounded object manipulation is a challenging
task. Synthesis methods based on 3D graphics modeling
overcomes these limitations by providing a means to generate realistic 3D scenes. However, the modeling process is
typically laborious, limiting the amount of detail and the
range of dynamic attributes that can be supported. Neural
rendering can be used to introduce more nuanced details
without manually creating the desired visual appearance.
In particular, differential neural rendering approaches based
on implicit representations allow deep learning models to
encode 3D-grounded representation, as well as visual attributes such as color and varying lighting conditions in the

artificial generated images. Only in the last few years have
there been cost-effective methods for generating large-scale
virtual scenes using implicit neural representation. Recently,
NeRF been a subject of considerable research. This intensive
research has led to the development of new deep learning
methods and models that adequately represent 3D data in
sophisticated and efficient ways. As a consequence of the
development these methods, a wide range of possibilities
are emerging regarding the training data for complex tasks
like autonomous driving, where the cost of camera-captured
data is exorbitant. As well as being able to generate more
plausible pixel images, modern differential neural rendering
models such as Block-NeRF [202] and Mega-NeRF [312] can
synthesize realistic, large-scale 3D videos of entire scenes
using only a few 2D images as input. These models basically map pixel space into the context of a continuous 3D
scene. This capability is highly promising in complex visual
perception tasks that require physics-aware interpretation of
input data. Conceivably, in the near future more powerful
and efficient NeRF models capable of generating large-scale,
fully dynamic and realistic 4D scenes will replace the existing methods for synthesizing training data for applications
such as robot navigation, autonomous driving and many 3D
perception tasks.

11

F UTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

The four main classes of synthetic data augmentation methods surveyed in this work are computer graphics modeling,
neural rendering, generative modeling and neural style
transfer. Overall, judging by recent trends, we expect significant progress in generative modeling and neural rendering
techniques and minimal progress in neural style transfer
methods. We also expect the applications of these methods
in more challenging machine intelligence tasks such as affordance learning, human-machine interaction and extended
reality. Progress in this areas will undoubtedly have a profound impact on the development of machine vision and
artificial intelligence as a whole. We outline most promising
future research directions in the following paragraphs.
a. Modeling multiple sensory modalities in an integrated and adaptive way
Recent interest in generative modeling and neural rendering approaches has led to the development of new
hybrid deep learning methods that combine the power of
state-of-the-art neural rendering techniques like NeRFs and
generative models such as GANs and VAEs to adequately
represent both 2D and 3D data in more effective and controllable ways. These approaches primarily exploit conditional
GAN and conditional VAE techniques to provide a form
of control over the visual properties of the synthesized
data, allowing models to learn multiple salient features
to enhance the realism of representations. This additional
dimension of flexibility and control can be leveraged by future synthesis models to specifically generate more dynamic
data whose appearance and properties change adaptively
with the visual context. For applications such as highlevel perception and long-term scene understanding, the
emergence of techniques that allow view-specific attributes
to be modified online in response to real-world conditions

25

Approach

Main advantages

Disadvantages

Generative modeling

•

Automates the process of generating
synthetic data
Can generate highly photorealistic data
without additional effort

•
•

Requires no training data whatsoever
End product fully controllable by
developer
Can support physically-plausible behaviors
Can generate very large virtual
environments

•

Can easily support 2D and 3D tasks
Allows easy manipulation of generated data
Can extend the capabilities of existing 3D
models

•
•

Relatively simple architectures
Low resource requirements
Easier to implement

•

•

Computer graphics modeling

•
•
•
•

Neural rendering

Neural style transfer

•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•
•
•

•

•

Lack of 3D interpretation
Requires representative examples of the
target class
Problems with mode collapse and
overfitting can lead to poor results
Subject to bias and perceptual limitations of
human developers
Extremely laborious
Requires extensive domain knowledge
May require the use of proprietary tools
Highly complex model architectures
Scene generation capacity limited to small
environments
Requires enormous amounts of data
Limited in the ability to generate
photorealistic data
Can only synthesize 2D images

Figure 28. A comparison of different data synthesis approaches.

would be extremely useful. More generally, the development of new data synthesis methods based on implicit neural rendering and generative modeling techniques will offer
opportunities to radically extend the capabilities of state- ofthe-art machine vision systems. Because implicit neural
representation techniques are spatio-temporally continuous
and differentiable, in addition to 3D visual information,
they can be used as universal function approximators to
model diverse sensory signals as well as complex physical
processes of the real world. Future research is expected to
produce new and improved ways to enable these diverse
sensory modalities and physical properties of objects to be
compactly integrated into a kind of universal framework.
Incorporating information-rich representation in this manner will undoubtedly help to improve “common sense”
reasoning capabilities of intelligent and robotic systems.
b. Towards more effective and efficient representation
and training
A major shortcoming with current data synthesis approaches, particularly generative modeling and neural
rendering techniques, is the need to use several examples from the target domain to guide the synthesis process, especially when training for 3D scene understanding
tasks. Many recent works have focused on achieving more
computationally-efficient representation that enables scene
data to scale up to city or metropolitan level environments.
Application domains such as outdoor scene understanding
and autonomous driving particularly require very large
continuous scenes which are currently challenging to synthesize owing to the enormous computational resource requirements. Today’s large-scale synthetic environments are
typically realized by stacking several smaller, image-level
scenes together, where each constituent “mini scene” is encoded by a dedicated NeRF model. Obviously, this is not the
most natural and effective way to represent scenes. A large
amount of future research efforts will increasingly focus on

achieving more sample-efficient training. One of the most
promising research goals is the development of unconditional 3D-aware data synthesis techniques that allow to generate high-quality, realistic 3D synthetic scenes without the
need for reference images. New synthesis methods will also
allow to utilize more parse representations to synthesize realistic data with detailed visual information. The integration
of neural radiance fields (NeRF) models into state-of-the-art
generative modeling architectures will increasingly provide
better ways to achieve more compact and unified differentiable representations of complex scenes. New techniques
resulting from further breakthroughs in this line of works, in
the not-so-distant future, can be used to generate seemingly
continuous and infinitely large scenes by exploiting more
effective and more efficient representation techniques.
c. Towards synthesis and representation of contextrelevant scene properties
Machine vision models mainly rely on visual appearance
of input data to make predictions. The realism of visual
features is, thus, the sole concern of developers and researchers when designing methods for synthesizing training
data. However, in more complex tasks such as affordance
learning, robot perception and dexterous manipulation, in
addition to synthesizing appearance and geometry, it is
often helpful to model non-visual properties such as friction,
mass and other semantic information about objects in the
scene. We expect that approaches that rely on jointly modeling visual information and high-level non-visual attributes
that reflect properties of the real world – or physics-aware
data synthesis – will become an important research topic
in the foreseeable future. Research in this direction will
facilitate new ways to represent visual and semantic context
information in more unified and coherent fashion. This
will allow the synthesis fully interactive 3D environments
without explicitly modeling object properties and behavior
to become possible.

26

d. Simulating less intuitive augmentation schemes
Current data synthesis approaches assume visual similarity of the original data or target domain and the generated image samples. Consequently, the generative modeling
process primarily aims to generate clean data that is as close
as possible to the target data. It is, however, known that
techniques such as random image perturbations can sometimes provide the most useful augmentations for improving
generalization. Thus, by focusing on more aligned semantic
content, data synthesis approaches based on generative
modeling usually ignore useful augmentation strategies that
rely on non-realistic data (e.g., methods such as blurring
and noise injection). At present, there is no workaround
that allows to generate implausible but effective data using
generative modeling.

12

C ONCLUSION

Synthetic data augmentation is a way to overcome data
scarcity in practical machine learning applications by
creating artificial samples from scratch. This survey
explores the most important approaches to generating
synthetic data for training computer vision models. We
present a detailed coverage of the methods, unique
properties, application scenarios, as well as the important
limitations of data synthesis methods for extending training
data. We also summarized the main features, generation
methods, supported tasks and application domains of
common publicly available, large-scale synthetic datasets.
Lastly, we investigate the effectiveness of data synthesis
approaches to data augmentation. The survey shows
that synthetic data augmentation methods provides an
effective means to obtain good generalization performance
in situations where it is difficult to access real data for
training. Moreover, for tasks such as optical flow, depth
estimation and visual odometry, where photorealism plays
no role in inference, training with synthetic data sometimes
yield better performance than with real data.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank...

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun,
“Carla: An open urban driving simulator,” in Conference on robot
learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1–16.
E. Kolve, R. Mottaghi, W. Han, E. VanderBilt, L. Weihs, A. Herrasti, D. Gordon, Y. Zhu, A. Gupta, and A. Farhadi, “Ai2-thor:
An interactive 3d environment for visual ai,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.05474, 2017.
G. Varol, J. Romero, X. Martin, N. Mahmood, M. J. Black,
I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “Learning from synthetic humans,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2017, pp. 109–117.
G. Rogez and C. Schmid, “Mocap-guided data augmentation for
3d pose estimation in the wild,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 29, 2016.
K. Mo, Y. Qin, F. Xiang, H. Su, and L. Guibas, “O2o-afford:
Annotation-free large-scale object-object affordance learning,” in
Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 1666–1677.
F.-J. Chu, R. Xu, and P. A. Vela, “Learning affordance segmentation for real-world robotic manipulation via synthetic images,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1140–1147,
2019.

[7] Y. Lin, C. Tang, F.-J. Chu, and P. A. Vela, “Using synthetic data
and deep networks to recognize primitive shapes for object
grasping,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2020, pp. 10 494–10 501.
A. Ummadisingu, K. Takahashi, and N. Fukaya, “Cluttered food
[8]
grasping with adaptive fingers and synthetic-data trained object
detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05187, 2022.
[9]
T. Kollar, M. Laskey, K. Stone, B. Thananjeyan, and M. Tjersland,
“Simnet: Enabling robust unknown object manipulation from
pure synthetic data via stereo,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 938–948.
[10] Z. Luo, W. Xue, J. Chae, and G. Fu, “Skp: Semantic 3d keypoint
detection for category-level robotic manipulation,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 5437–5444, 2022.
[11] A. H. Ornek and M. Ceylan, “Comparison of traditional transformations for data augmentation in deep learning of medical
thermography,” in 2019 42nd International Conference on Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP). IEEE, 2019, pp. 191–194.
[12] K. Wang, B. Fang, J. Qian, S. Yang, X. Zhou, and J. Zhou, “Perspective transformation data augmentation for object detection,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 4935–4943, 2019.
[13] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-net: Fully convolutional neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation,” in 2016 fourth international conference on 3D vision (3DV).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 565–571.
[14] E. K. Kim, H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, and S. Kim, “Data augmentation
method by applying color perturbation of inverse psnr and
geometric transformations for object recognition based on deep
learning,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 3755, 2020.
[15] D. Sakkos, H. P. Shum, and E. S. Ho, “Illumination-based data
augmentation for robust background subtraction,” in 2019 13th
International Conference on Software, Knowledge, Information Management and Applications (SKIMA). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[16] O. Mazhar and J. Kober, “Random shadows and highlights: A
new data augmentation method for extreme lighting conditions,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05361, 2021.
[17] A. Kotwal, R. Bhalodia, and S. P. Awate, “Joint desmoking and
denoising of laparoscopy images,” in 2016 IEEE 13th International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1050–
1054.
[18] H. Li, X. Zhang, Q. Tian, and H. Xiong, “Attribute mix: semantic
data augmentation for fine grained recognition,” in 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP). IEEE, 2020, pp. 243–246.
[19] S. Feng, S. Yang, Z. Niu, J. Xie, M. Wei, and P. Li, “Grid cut
and mix: flexible and efficient data augmentation,” in Twelfth
International Conference on Graphics and Image Processing (ICGIP
2020), vol. 11720. International Society for Optics and Photonics,
2021, p. 1172028.
[20] S. Yun, D. Han, S. J. Oh, S. Chun, J. Choe, and Y. Yoo, “Cutmix:
Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable
features,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision, 2019, pp. 6023–6032.
[21] J. Yoo, N. Ahn, and K.-A. Sohn, “Rethinking data augmentation
for image super-resolution: A comprehensive analysis and a new
strategy,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 8375–8384.
[22] J. Lemley, S. Bazrafkan, and P. Corcoran, “Smart augmentation
learning an optimal data augmentation strategy,” Ieee Access,
vol. 5, pp. 5858–5869, 2017.
[23] X. Li, Y. Dai, Y. Ge, J. Liu, Y. Shan, and L.-Y. Duan, “Uncertainty
modeling for out-of-distribution generalization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.03958, 2022.
[24] X. Bouthillier, K. Konda, P. Vincent, and R. Memisevic, “Dropout
as data augmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.08700, 2015.
[25] B.-B. Jia and M.-L. Zhang, “Multi-dimensional classification via
selective feature augmentation,” Machine Intelligence Research,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 38–51, 2022.
[26] K. Maharana, S. Mondal, and B. Nemade, “A review: Data preprocessing and data augmentation techniques,” Global Transitions
Proceedings, 2022.
[27] C. Shorten and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on image data
augmentation for deep learning,” Journal of big data, vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 1–48, 2019.
[28] S. Yang, W. Xiao, M. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Zhao, and F. Shen, “Image
data augmentation for deep learning: A survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.08610, 2022.

27

[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]
[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]
[47]

[48]
[49]

C. Khosla and B. S. Saini, “Enhancing performance of deep [50]
learning models with different data augmentation techniques: A
survey,” in 2020 International Conference on Intelligent Engineering
and Management (ICIEM). IEEE, 2020, pp. 79–85.
N. E. Khalifa, M. Loey, and S. Mirjalili, “A comprehensive survey
of recent trends in deep learning for digital images augmenta- [51]
tion,” Artificial Intelligence Review, pp. 1–27, 2021.
G. E. Hinton and T. J. Sejnowski, “Optimal perceptual inference,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern [52]
Recognition, vol. 448. Citeseer, 1983, pp. 448–453.
P. R. Jeyaraj and E. R. S. Nadar, “Deep boltzmann machine
algorithm for accurate medical image analysis for classification [53]
of cancerous region,” Cognitive Computation and Systems, vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 85–90, 2019.
[54]
I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. WardeFarley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” Advances in neural information processing systems, [55]
vol. 27, 2014.
D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
H. Akaike, “autoregressive models for regression,” Annals of the [56]
Institute of Statistical Mathematics, vol. 21, pp. 243–247, 1969.
J. M. Susskind, G. E. Hinton, J. R. Movellan, and A. K. Anderson,
“Generating facial expressions with deep belief nets,” Affective [57]
Computing, Emotion Modelling, Synthesis and Recognition, pp. 421–
440, 2008.
A. Srivastava, L. Valkov, C. Russell, M. U. Gutmann, and C. Sutton, “Veegan: Reducing mode collapse in gans using implicit [58]
variational learning,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 30, 2017.
L. Mescheder, S. Nowozin, and A. Geiger, “Adversarial variational bayes: Unifying variational autoencoders and generative
adversarial networks,” in International Conference on Machine [59]
Learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 2391–2400.
J. Peng, D. Liu, S. Xu, and H. Li, “Generating diverse structure for
image inpainting with hierarchical vq-vae,” in Proceedings of the [60]
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 10 775–10 784.
P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image
translation with conditional adversarial networks,” in Proceedings [61]
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2017, pp. 1125–1134.
E. L. Denton, S. Chintala, R. Fergus et al., “Deep generative image
models using a laplacian pyramid of adversarial networks,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 28, 2015.
[62]
X. Chen, Y. Duan, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and
P. Abbeel, “Infogan: Interpretable representation learning by
information maximizing generative adversarial nets,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 29, 2016.
[63]
C. Ledig, L. Theis, F. Huszár, J. Caballero, A. Cunningham,
A. Acosta, A. Aitken, A. Tejani, J. Totz, Z. Wang et al., “Photorealistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial network,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer [64]
vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 4681–4690.
T. Kim, M. Cha, H. Kim, J. K. Lee, and J. Kim, “Learning
to discover cross-domain relations with generative adversarial
networks,” in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, [65]
2017, pp. 1857–1865.
J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-toimage translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
2017, pp. 2223–2232.
[66]
H. Zhang, I. Goodfellow, D. Metaxas, and A. Odena, “Selfattention generative adversarial networks,” in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 7354–7363.
K. Schwarz, Y. Liao, M. Niemeyer, and A. Geiger, “Graf: Gener- [67]
ative radiance fields for 3d-aware image synthesis,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 20 154–20 166,
2020.
Y. Xue, Y. Li, K. K. Singh, and Y. J. Lee, “Giraffe hd: [68]
A high-resolution 3d-aware generative model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.14954, 2022.
E. R. Chan, M. Monteiro, P. Kellnhofer, J. Wu, and G. Wetzstein,
“pi-gan: Periodic implicit generative adversarial networks for 3d- [69]
aware image synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 5799–5809.

X. Zhang, Z. Zheng, D. Gao, B. Zhang, P. Pan, and Y. Yang,
“Multi-view consistent generative adversarial networks for 3daware image synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 18 450–
18 459.
H. Ohno, “Auto-encoder-based generative models for data augmentation on regression problems,” Soft Computing, vol. 24,
no. 11, pp. 7999–8009, 2020.
G. Mariani, F. Scheidegger, R. Istrate, C. Bekas, and C. Malossi,
“Bagan: Data augmentation with balancing gan,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.09655, 2018.
J. Donahue, P. Krähenbühl, and T. Darrell, “Adversarial feature
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09782, 2016.
V. Dumoulin, I. Belghazi, B. Poole, O. Mastropietro, A. Lamb,
M. Arjovsky, and A. Courville, “Adversarially learned inference,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00704, 2016.
M. Brundage, S. Avin, J. Clark, H. Toner, P. Eckersley, B. Garfinkel,
A. Dafoe, P. Scharre, T. Zeitzoff, B. Filar et al., “The malicious use
of artificial intelligence: Forecasting, prevention, and mitigation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07228, 2018.
A. Brock, J. Donahue, and K. Simonyan, “Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural image synthesis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
A. B. L. Larsen, S. K. Sønderby, H. Larochelle, and O. Winther,
“Autoencoding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric,”
in International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2016, pp.
1558–1566.
M. Frid-Adar, E. Klang, M. Amitai, J. Goldberger, and
H. Greenspan, “Synthetic data augmentation using gan for improved liver lesion classification,” in 2018 IEEE 15th international
symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI 2018). IEEE, 2018, pp. 289–
293.
D. Ribli, A. Horváth, Z. Unger, P. Pollner, and I. Csabai, “Detecting and classifying lesions in mammograms with deep learning,”
Scientific reports, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2018.
X. Wang, A. Shrivastava, and A. Gupta, “A-fast-rcnn: Hard positive generation via adversary for object detection,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2017, pp. 2606–2615.
X. Peng, Z. Tang, F. Yang, R. S. Feris, and D. Metaxas, “Jointly
optimize data augmentation and network training: Adversarial
data augmentation in human pose estimation,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2018, pp. 2226–2234.
Y. Song, C. Ma, X. Wu, L. Gong, L. Bao, W. Zuo, C. Shen,
R. W. Lau, and M.-H. Yang, “Vital: Visual tracking via adversarial
learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 8990–8999.
M. Frid-Adar, I. Diamant, E. Klang, M. Amitai, J. Goldberger, and
H. Greenspan, “Gan-based synthetic medical image augmentation for increased cnn performance in liver lesion classification,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 321, pp. 321–331, 2018.
C. Bowles, L. Chen, R. Guerrero, P. Bentley, R. Gunn, A. Hammers, D. A. Dickie, M. V. Hernández, J. Wardlaw, and D. Rueckert, “Gan augmentation: Augmenting training data using generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.10863, 2018.
A. Madani, M. Moradi, A. Karargyris, and T. Syeda-Mahmood,
“Chest x-ray generation and data augmentation for cardiovascular abnormality classification,” in Medical Imaging 2018: Image
Processing, vol. 10574. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 2018, p. 105741M.
N. Souly, C. Spampinato, and M. Shah, “Semi supervised semantic segmentation using generative adversarial network,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
2017, pp. 5688–5696.
S. Kaur, H. Aggarwal, and R. Rani, “Mr image synthesis using
generative adversarial networks for parkinson’s disease classification,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Applications. Spring, 2021, pp. 317–327.
S. Kaplan, L. Lensu, L. Laaksonen, and H. Uusitalo, “Evaluation
of unconditioned deep generative synthesis of retinal images,” in
International Conference on Advanced Concepts for Intelligent Vision
Systems. Springer, 2020, pp. 262–273.
W. Fang, F. Zhang, V. S. Sheng, and Y. Ding, “A method for improving cnn-based image recognition using dcgan,” Computers,
Materials and Continua, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 167–178, 2018.

28

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]
[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]
[79]
[80]

[81]
[82]

[83]

[84]
[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]
[89]
[90]

C.-H. Lin, E. Yumer, O. Wang, E. Shechtman, and S. Lucey, “Stgan: Spatial transformer generative adversarial networks for
image compositing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 9455–9464.
S. C. Medin, B. Egger, A. Cherian, Y. Wang, J. B. Tenenbaum,
X. Liu, and T. K. Marks, “Most-gan: 3d morphable stylegan
for disentangled face image manipulation,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 2, 2022, pp.
1962–1971.
Z. Chen, Z. Zeng, H. Shen, X. Zheng, P. Dai, and P. Ouyang, “Dngan: Denoising generative adversarial networks for speckle noise
reduction in optical coherence tomography images,” Biomedical
Signal Processing and Control, vol. 55, p. 101632, 2020.
D.-P. Fan, Z. Huang, P. Zheng, H. Liu, X. Qin, and L. Van Gool,
“Facial-sketch synthesis: a new challenge,” Machine Intelligence
Research, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 257–287, 2022.
P. L. Suárez, A. D. Sappa, and B. X. Vintimilla, “Infrared image
colorization based on a triplet dcgan architecture,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, 2017, pp. 18–23.
X. Zhao, F. Ma, D. Güera, Z. Ren, A. G. Schwing, and A. Colburn,
“Generative multiplane images: Making a 2d gan 3d-aware,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2022, pp. 18–
35.
R. Huang, S. Zhang, T. Li, and R. He, “Beyond face rotation:
Global and local perception gan for photorealistic and identity
preserving frontal view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 2439–2448.
Y.-J. Ju, G.-H. Lee, J.-H. Hong, and S.-W. Lee, “Complete face
recovery gan: Unsupervised joint face rotation and de-occlusion
from a single-view image,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2022, pp. 3711–3721.
X. Chen, X. Luo, J. Weng, W. Luo, H. Li, and Q. Tian, “Multiview gait image generation for cross-view gait recognition,” IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 30, pp. 3041–3055, 2021.
S. Kim, J. Lee, and B. C. Ko, “Ssl-mot: self-supervised learning
based multi-object tracking,” Applied Intelligence, pp. 1–11, 2022.
X. Wang, C. Li, B. Luo, and J. Tang, “Sint++: Robust visual tracking via adversarial positive instance generation,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018,
pp. 4864–4873.
Q. Wu, Z. Chen, L. Cheng, Y. Yan, B. Li, and H. Wang, “Hallucinated adversarial learning for robust visual tracking,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.07008, 2019.
J. Liu, B. Ni, Y. Yan, P. Zhou, S. Cheng, and J. Hu, “Pose
transferrable person re-identification,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp.
4099–4108.
Z. Zheng, L. Zheng, and Y. Yang, “Unlabeled samples generated
by gan improve the person re-identification baseline in vitro,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
2017, pp. 3754–3762.
M. Zanfir, A.-I. Popa, A. Zanfir, and C. Sminchisescu, “Human
appearance transfer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 5391–5399.
K. Saleh, S. Szénási, and Z. Vámossy, “Occlusion handling in
generic object detection: A review,” in 2021 IEEE 19th World
Symposium on Applied Machine Intelligence and Informatics (SAMI).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 000 477–000 484.
L. Minciullo, F. Manhardt, K. Yoshikawa, S. Meier, F. Tombari,
and N. Kobori, “Db-gan: Boosting object recognition under
strong lighting conditions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 2939–2949.
Z. Yi, H. Zhang, P. Tan, and M. Gong, “Dualgan: Unsupervised
dual learning for image-to-image translation,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 2849–
2857.
W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Min,
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong et al., “A survey of large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
J. Zhang, J. Huang, S. Jin, and S. Lu, “Vision-language models for
vision tasks: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2024.
H. Zhang, V. Sindagi, and V. M. Patel, “Image de-raining using a
conditional generative adversarial network,” IEEE transactions on
circuits and systems for video technology, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3943–
3956, 2019.

[91]

[92]
[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]
[97]

[98]

[99]
[100]
[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]
[105]
[106]

[107]

[108]
[109]

[110]
[111]
[112]

S. K. Jemni, M. A. Souibgui, Y. Kessentini, and A. Fornés,
“Enhance to read better: A multi-task adversarial network for
handwritten document image enhancement,” Pattern Recognition,
vol. 123, p. 108370, 2022.
J. Liang, M. Li, Y. Jia, and R. Sun, “Single image dehazing in
3d space with more stable gans,” in Proceedings of 2021 Chinese
Intelligent Systems Conference. Springer, 2022, pp. 581–590.
X. Li, G. Teng, P. An, H. Yao, and Y. Chen, “Advertisement logo
compositing via adversarial geometric consistency pursuit,” in
2019 IEEE Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
J. Kossaifi, L. Tran, Y. Panagakis, and M. Pantic, “Gagan:
Geometry-aware generative adversarial networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2018, pp. 878–887.
F. Zhan, C. Xue, and S. Lu, “Ga-dan: Geometry-aware domain
adaptation network for scene text detection and recognition,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2019, pp. 9105–9115.
S. Treneska, E. Zdravevski, I. M. Pires, P. Lameski, and S. Gievska,
“Gan-based image colorization for self-supervised visual feature
learning,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 4, p. 1599, 2022.
X. Wang, K. Yu, S. Wu, J. Gu, Y. Liu, C. Dong, Y. Qiao, and
C. Change Loy, “Esrgan: Enhanced super-resolution generative
adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision (ECCV) workshops, 2018, pp. 0–0.
W. Wang, H. Wang, S. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Lei,
Z. Zhang, and Z. Dong, “Resolution enhancement in microscopic
imaging based on generative adversarial network with unpaired
data,” Optics Communications, vol. 503, p. 127454, 2022.
S. N. Rai and C. Jawahar, “Removing atmospheric turbulence via
deep adversarial learning,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
vol. 31, pp. 2633–2646, 2022.
S. Tripathi, Z. C. Lipton, and T. Q. Nguyen, “Correction by projection: Denoising images with generative adversarial networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.04477, 2018.
Q. Lyu, C. You, H. Shan, Y. Zhang, and G. Wang, “Superresolution mri and ct through gan-circle,” in Developments in Xray tomography XII, vol. 11113. International Society for Optics
and Photonics, 2019, p. 111130X.
F. Chiaroni, M.-C. Rahal, N. Hueber, and F. Dufaux, “Hallucinating a cleanly labeled augmented dataset from a noisy labeled
dataset using gan,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing (ICIP). IEEE, 2019, pp. 3616–3620.
W. Lira, J. Merz, D. Ritchie, D. Cohen-Or, and H. Zhang, “Ganhopper: Multi-hop gan for unsupervised image-to-image translation,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer, 2020,
pp. 363–379.
E. Ntavelis, M. Shahbazi, I. Kastanis, R. Timofte, M. Danelljan,
and L. Van Gool, “Arbitrary-scale image synthesis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02273, 2022.
L. Sixt, B. Wild, and T. Landgraf, “Rendergan: Generating realistic
labeled data,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 5, p. 66, 2018.
J. Zhao, L. Xiong, P. Karlekar Jayashree, J. Li, F. Zhao, Z. Wang,
P. Sugiri Pranata, P. Shengmei Shen, S. Yan, and J. Feng, “Dualagent gans for photorealistic and identity preserving profile
face synthesis,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 30, 2017.
A. J. Ratner, H. Ehrenberg, Z. Hussain, J. Dunnmon, and C. Ré,
“Learning to compose domain-specific transformations for data
augmentation,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 30, 2017.
S. Zhao, Z. Liu, J. Lin, J.-Y. Zhu, and S. Han, “Differentiable
augmentation for data-efficient gan training,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 7559–7570, 2020.
T. Karras, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, S. Laine, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila,
“Training generative adversarial networks with limited data,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp.
12 104–12 114, 2020.
N.-T. Tran, V.-H. Tran, N.-B. Nguyen, T.-K. Nguyen, and N.-M.
Cheung, “Towards good practices for data augmentation in gan
training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05338, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 3, 2020.
H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, A. Odena, and H. Lee, “Consistency regularization for generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.12027, 2019.
Z. Zhao, S. Singh, H. Lee, Z. Zhang, A. Odena, and H. Zhang,
“Improved consistency regularization for gans,” in Proceedings of

29

[113]
[114]
[115]
[116]

[117]
[118]

[119]
[120]

[121]
[122]

[123]

[124]
[125]

[126]

[127]
[128]

[129]
[130]
[131]

[132]
[133]

the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 35, no. 12, 2021,
pp. 11 033–11 041.
S. Park, Y.-J. Yeo, and Y.-G. Shin, “Generative adversarial network
using perturbed-convolutions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.10841,
vol. 1, no. 3, p. 8, 2021.
B. Dodin and M. Sirvanci, “Stochastic networks and the extreme
value distribution,” Computers & operations research, vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 397–409, 1990.
S. Bhatia, A. Jain, and B. Hooi, “Exgan: Adversarial generation
of extreme samples,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 8, 2021, pp. 6750–6758.
L. Liu, M. Muelly, J. Deng, T. Pfister, and L.-J. Li, “Generative
modeling for small-data object detection,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp.
6073–6081.
A. Gretton, K. M. Borgwardt, M. J. Rasch, B. Schölkopf, and
A. Smola, “A kernel two-sample test,” The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 723–773, 2012.
Z. Wang, E. P. Simoncelli, and A. C. Bovik, “Multiscale structural
similarity for image quality assessment,” in The Thrity-Seventh
Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers, 2003, vol. 2.
Ieee, 2003, pp. 1398–1402.
T. Salimans, I. Goodfellow, W. Zaremba, V. Cheung, A. Radford,
and X. Chen, “Improved techniques for training gans,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 29, 2016.
M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and
S. Hochreiter, “Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
C. Nash, J. Menick, S. Dieleman, and P. W. Battaglia, “Generating images with sparse representations,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.03841, 2021.
M. J. Chong and D. Forsyth, “Effectively unbiased fid and inception score and where to find them,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020, pp.
6070–6079.
C.-Y. Bai, H.-T. Lin, C. Raffel, and W. C.-w. Kan, “On training
sample memorization: Lessons from benchmarking generative
modeling with a large-scale competition,” in Proceedings of the
27th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2021, pp. 2534–2542.
S. Liu, Y. Wei, J. Lu, and J. Zhou, “An improved evaluation
framework for generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.07474, 2018.
S. Zhou, M. Gordon, R. Krishna, A. Narcomey, L. F. Fei-Fei, and
M. Bernstein, “Hype: A benchmark for human eye perceptual
evaluation of generative models,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
P. Salehi, A. Chalechale, and M. Taghizadeh, “Generative adversarial networks (gans): An overview of theoretical model,
evaluation metrics, and recent developments,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.13178, 2020.
H. Thanh-Tung and T. Tran, “Catastrophic forgetting and mode
collapse in gans,” in 2020 international joint conference on neural
networks (ijcnn). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–10.
L. Xu, X. Zeng, Z. Huang, W. Li, and H. Zhang, “Low-dose
chest x-ray image super-resolution using generative adversarial
nets with spectral normalization,” Biomedical Signal Processing and
Control, vol. 55, p. 101600, 2020.
M. Lee and J. Seok, “Regularization methods for generative adversarial networks: An overview of recent studies,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.09165, 2020.
Q. Hoang, T. D. Nguyen, T. Le, and D. Phung, “Mgan: Training
generative adversarial nets with multiple generators,” in International conference on learning representations, 2018.
M. M. Saad, R. O’ Reilly, and M. H. Rehmani, “A survey on training challenges in generative adversarial networks for biomedical
image analysis,” Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 57, no. 2, p. 19,
2024.
Z. Zhou, Q. Zhang, G. Lu, H. Wang, W. Zhang, and Y. Yu,
“Adashift: Decorrelation and convergence of adaptive learning
rate methods,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00143, 2018.
Y. Gan, T. Xiang, H. Liu, M. Ye, and M. Zhou, “Generative
adversarial networks with adaptive learning strategy for noiseto-image synthesis,” Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 35,
no. 8, pp. 6197–6206, 2023.

[134]
[135]

[136]

[137]
[138]

[139]
[140]

[141]

[142]
[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148]

[149]
[150]

[151]

[152]

[153]

K. Li and D.-K. Kang, “Enhanced generative adversarial networks with restart learning rate in discriminator,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 1191, 2022.
C. G. Korde, M. Vasantha et al., “Training of generative adversarial networks with hybrid evolutionary optimization technique,”
in 2019 IEEE 16th India Council International Conference (INDICON). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
H. Su, C. R. Qi, Y. Li, and L. J. Guibas, “Render for cnn:
Viewpoint estimation in images using cnns trained with rendered
3d model views,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision, 2015, pp. 2686–2694.
X. Peng, B. Sun, K. Ali, and K. Saenko, “Learning deep object
detectors from 3d models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, 2015, pp. 1278–1286.
S. Liu and S. Ostadabbas, “A semi-supervised data augmentation
approach using 3d graphical engines,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops, 2018, pp.
0–0.
R. Sulzer, L. Landrieu, A. Boulch, R. Marlet, and B. Vallet,
“Deep surface reconstruction from point clouds with visibility
information,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01810, 2022.
J. Malik, S. Shimada, A. Elhayek, S. A. Ali, V. Golyanik,
C. Theobalt, and D. Stricker, “Handvoxnet++: 3d hand shape
and pose estimation using voxel-based neural networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2021.
F. Bongini, L. Berlincioni, M. Bertini, and A. Del Bimbo, “Partially
fake it till you make it: mixing real and fake thermal images
for improved object detection,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, 2021, pp. 5482–5490.
V. Hegde and R. Zadeh, “Fusionnet: 3d object classification using
multiple data representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05695,
2016.
M. Roberts, J. Ramapuram, A. Ranjan, A. Kumar, M. A. Bautista,
N. Paczan, R. Webb, and J. M. Susskind, “Hypersim: A photorealistic synthetic dataset for holistic indoor scene understanding,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2021, pp. 10 912–10 922.
J. Collins, S. Goel, K. Deng, A. Luthra, L. Xu, E. Gundogdu,
X. Zhang, T. F. Y. Vicente, T. Dideriksen, H. Arora et al., “Abo:
Dataset and benchmarks for real-world 3d object understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 21 126–21 136.
H. Hattori, V. Naresh Boddeti, K. M. Kitani, and T. Kanade,
“Learning scene-specific pedestrian detectors without real data,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2015, pp. 3819–3827.
A. X. Chang, T. Funkhouser, L. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang,
Z. Li, S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su et al., “Shapenet:
An information-rich 3d model repository,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
Z. Wu, S. Song, A. Khosla, F. Yu, L. Zhang, X. Tang, and J. Xiao,
“3d shapenets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2015, pp. 1912–1920.
I. B. Barbosa, M. Cristani, B. Caputo, A. Rognhaugen, and
T. Theoharis, “Looking beyond appearances: Synthetic training
data for deep cnns in re-identification,” Computer Vision and Image
Understanding, vol. 167, pp. 50–62, 2018.
K. Ashish and S. Shital, “Microsoft extends airsim to include
autonomous car research.”
S. Shah, D. Dey, C. Lovett, and A. Kapoor, “Airsim: High-fidelity
visual and physical simulation for autonomous vehicles,” in Field
and Service Robotics: Results of the 11th International Conference.
Springer, 2018, pp. 621–635.
H. Abu Alhaija, S. K. Mustikovela, L. Mescheder, A. Geiger, and
C. Rother, “Augmented reality meets computer vision: Efficient
data generation for urban driving scenes,” International Journal of
Computer Vision, vol. 126, no. 9, pp. 961–972, 2018.
N. Jaipuria, X. Zhang, R. Bhasin, M. Arafa, P. Chakravarty,
S. Shrivastava, S. Manglani, and V. N. Murali, “Deflating dataset
bias using synthetic data augmentation,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, 2020, pp. 772–773.
S. Borkman, A. Crespi, S. Dhakad, S. Ganguly, J. Hogins, Y.C. Jhang, M. Kamalzadeh, B. Li, S. Leal, P. Parisi et al., “Unity
perception: Generate synthetic data for computer vision,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.04259, 2021.

30

[154]
[155]

[156]
[157]

[158]

[159]
[160]
[161]
[162]

[163]

[164]

[165]
[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]

[170]

[171]

[172]

[173]

J. Jang, H. Lee, and J.-C. Kim, “Carfree: Hassle-free object detection dataset generation using carla autonomous driving simulator,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 281, 2021.
K. M. Hart, A. B. Goodman, and R. P. O’Shea, “Automatic
generation of machine learning synthetic data using ros,” in
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer,
2021, pp. 310–325.
M. S. Mueller and B. Jutzi, “Uas navigation with squeezeposenet
accuracy boosting for pose regression by data augmentation,”
Drones, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 7, 2018.
N. Koenig and A. Howard, “Design and use paradigms
for gazebo, an open-source multi-robot simulator,” in 2004
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS)(IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37566), vol. 3. IEEE, 2004, pp. 2149–
2154.
A. Kerim, L. Soriano Marcolino, and R. Jiang, “Silver: Novel
rendering engine for data hungry computer vision models,” in
2nd International Workshop on Data Quality Assessment for Machine
Learning, 2021.
A. Shafaei, J. J. Little, and M. Schmidt, “Play and learn: Using
video games to train computer vision models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.01745, 2016.
S. R. Richter, V. Vineet, S. Roth, and V. Koltun, “Playing for data:
Ground truth from computer games,” in European conference on
computer vision. Springer, 2016, pp. 102–118.
D. J. Butler, J. Wulff, G. B. Stanley, and M. J. Black, “A naturalistic
open source movie for optical flow evaluation,” in European
conference on computer vision. Springer, 2012, pp. 611–625.
A. Gaidon, Q. Wang, Y. Cabon, and E. Vig, “Virtual worlds as
proxy for multi-object tracking analysis,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016,
pp. 4340–4349.
C. Roberto de Souza, A. Gaidon, Y. Cabon, and A. Manuel Lopez,
“Procedural generation of videos to train deep action recognition
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 4757–4767.
G. Ros, L. Sellart, J. Materzynska, D. Vazquez, and A. M. Lopez,
“The synthia dataset: A large collection of synthetic images for
semantic segmentation of urban scenes,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016,
pp. 3234–3243.
M. Wrenninge and J. Unger, “Synscapes: A photorealistic
synthetic dataset for street scene parsing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.08705, 2018.
E. Cheung, T. K. Wong, A. Bera, X. Wang, and D. Manocha,
“Lcrowdv: Generating labeled videos for simulation-based
crowd behavior learning,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision. Springer, 2016, pp. 709–727.
Z. Li, T.-W. Yu, S. Sang, S. Wang, M. Song, Y. Liu, Y.-Y. Yeh,
R. Zhu, N. Gundavarapu, J. Shi et al., “Openrooms: An open
framework for photorealistic indoor scene datasets,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2021, pp. 7190–7199.
R. Sandhu, S. Dambreville, and A. Tannenbaum, “Point set
registration via particle filtering and stochastic dynamics,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 32,
no. 8, pp. 1459–1473, 2009.
K. Vyas, L. Jiang, S. Liu, and S. Ostadabbas, “An efficient 3d
synthetic model generation pipeline for human pose data augmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 1542–1552.
F. Bogo, M. J. Black, M. Loper, and J. Romero, “Detailed fullbody reconstructions of moving people from monocular rgb-d
sequences,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, 2015, pp. 2300–2308.
N. Hesse, S. Pujades, M. J. Black, M. Arens, U. G. Hofmann, and
A. S. Schroeder, “Learning and tracking the 3d body shape of
freely moving infants from rgb-d sequences,” IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2540–
2551, 2019.
A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and
M. Nießner, “Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of
indoor scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 5828–5839.
G. Chogovadze, R. Pautrat, and M. Pollefeys, “Controllable
data augmentation through deep relighting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.13996, 2021.

[174]
[175]
[176]

[177]

[178]

[179]

[180]
[181]
[182]

[183]
[184]

[185]
[186]

[187]

[188]

[189]

[190]
[191]

[192]

[193]
[194]

C. Sevastopoulos, S. Konstantopoulos, K. Balaji, M. Zaki Zadeh,
and F. Makedon, “A simulated environment for robot vision
experiments,” Technologies, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 7, 2022.
S. Moro and T. Komuro, “Generation of virtual reality environment based on 3d scanned indoor physical space,” in International
Symposium on Visual Computing. Springer, 2021, pp. 492–503.
M. Sra, S. Garrido-Jurado, and P. Maes, “Oasis: Procedurally
generated social virtual spaces from 3d scanned real spaces,”
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 3174–3187, 2017.
H. A. Alhaija, S. K. Mustikovela, L. Mescheder, A. Geiger, and
C. Rother, “Augmented reality meets deep learning for car instance segmentation in urban scenes,” in British machine vision
conference, vol. 1, 2017, p. 2.
J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
“Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks
from simulation to the real world,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ international
conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS). IEEE, 2017, pp.
23–30.
A. Dosovitskiy, P. Fischer, E. Ilg, P. Hausser, C. Hazirbas,
V. Golkov, P. Van Der Smagt, D. Cremers, and T. Brox, “Flownet:
Learning optical flow with convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015,
pp. 2758–2766.
R. Gao, Z. Si, Y.-Y. Chang, S. Clarke, J. Bohg, L. Fei-Fei, W. Yuan,
and J. Wu, “Objectfolder 2.0: A multisensory object dataset for
sim2real transfer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02389, 2022.
A. Barisic, F. Petric, and S. Bogdan, “Sim2air-synthetic aerial
dataset for uav monitoring,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 3757–3764, 2022.
K. Dimitropoulos, I. Hatzilygeroudis, and K. Chatzilygeroudis,
“A brief survey of sim2real methods for robot learning,” in
International Conference on Robotics in Alpe-Adria Danube Region.
Springer, 2022, pp. 133–140.
T. Ikeda, S. Tanishige, A. Amma, M. Sudano, H. Audren, and
K. Nishiwaki, “Sim2real instance-level style transfer for 6d pose
estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02069, 2022.
A. Shrivastava, T. Pfister, O. Tuzel, J. Susskind, W. Wang, and
R. Webb, “Learning from simulated and unsupervised images
through adversarial training,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 2107–2116.
D.-Y. She and K. Xu, “Contrastive self-supervised representation
learning using synthetic data,” International Journal of Automation
and Computing, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 556–567, 2021.
A. Atapour-Abarghouei and T. P. Breckon, “Real-time monocular
depth estimation using synthetic data with domain adaptation
via image style transfer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 2800–2810.
S. Huang and D. Ramanan, “Expecting the unexpected: Training
detectors for unusual pedestrians with adversarial imposters,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 2243–2252.
L. Zheng, Z. Bie, Y. Sun, J. Wang, C. Su, S. Wang, and
Q. Tian, “Mars: A video benchmark for large-scale person reidentification,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European
Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part VI 14. Springer, 2016, pp. 868–884.
Z. Chen, W. Ouyang, T. Liu, and D. Tao, “A shape transformationbased dataset augmentation framework for pedestrian detection,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 129, no. 4, pp.
1121–1138, 2021.
L. Ma, X. Jia, Q. Sun, B. Schiele, T. Tuytelaars, and L. Van Gool,
“Pose guided person image generation,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
Y. Pang, J. Cao, J. Wang, and J. Han, “Jcs-net: Joint classification
and super-resolution network for small-scale pedestrian detection in surveillance images,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 3322–3331, 2019.
J. Shotton, T. Sharp, A. Kipman, A. Fitzgibbon, M. Finocchio,
A. Blake, M. Cook, and R. Moore, “Real-time human pose recognition in parts from single depth images,” Communications of the
ACM, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 116–124, 2013.
P. Tokmakov, K. Alahari, and C. Schmid, “Learning motion patterns in videos,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 3386–3394.
N. Mayer, E. Ilg, P. Hausser, P. Fischer, D. Cremers, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox, “A large dataset to train convolutional

31

[195]

[196]

[197]
[198]
[199]

[200]

[201]

[202]

[203]

[204]
[205]
[206]

[207]
[208]
[209]

[210]
[211]

[212]

[213]

[214]

networks for disparity, optical flow, and scene flow estimation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2016, pp. 4040–4048.
G. Yang, H. Zhao, J. Shi, Z. Deng, and J. Jia, “Segstereo: Exploiting
semantic information for disparity estimation,” in Proceedings of
the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 636–
651.
E. Ilg, N. Mayer, T. Saikia, M. Keuper, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox,
“Flownet 2.0: Evolution of optical flow estimation with deep
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 2462–2470.
“From traditional rendering to differentiable rendering: Theories,
methods and applications. scientia sinica informationis, vol.51,
no.7, pp.1043-1067, 2021.” 2017.
H. Kato, Y. Ushiku, and T. Harada, “Neural 3d mesh renderer,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2018, pp. 3907–3916.
M. de La Gorce, N. Paragios, and D. J. Fleet, “Model-based hand
tracking with texture, shading and self-occlusions,” in 2008 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 2008,
pp. 1–8.
J. Liu, C.-H. Wu, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, Y. Zhou, H. Huang, C. Wang,
S. Cai, Y. Ding, H. Fan et al., “Learning raw image denoising with
bayer pattern unification and bayer preserving augmentation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2019, pp. 0–0.
B. Mildenhall, P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. Barron, and R. Ng,
“Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis,” in Proc. of European Conference on Computer Vision, Virtual,
2020.
M. Tancik, V. Casser, X. Yan, S. Pradhan, B. Mildenhall,
P. P. Srinivasan, J. T. Barron, and H. Kretzschmar, “Blocknerf: Scalable large scene neural view synthesis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.05263, 2022.
V. Sitzmann, J. Thies, F. Heide, M. Nießner, G. Wetzstein, and
M. Zollhofer, “Deepvoxels: Learning persistent 3d feature embeddings,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 2437–2446.
L. Liu, J. Gu, K. Zaw Lin, T.-S. Chua, and C. Theobalt, “Neural
sparse voxel fields,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 33, pp. 15 651–15 663, 2020.
E. Insafutdinov and A. Dosovitskiy, “Unsupervised learning of
shape and pose with differentiable point clouds,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.
S. Baek, K. I. Kim, and T.-K. Kim, “Pushing the envelope for rgbbased dense 3d hand pose estimation via neural rendering,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 1067–1076.
J. Thies, M. Zollhöfer, and M. Nießner, “Deferred neural rendering: Image synthesis using neural textures,” ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1–12, 2019.
K.-A. Aliev, A. Sevastopolsky, M. Kolos, D. Ulyanov, and V. Lempitsky, “Neural point-based graphics,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision. Springer, 2020, pp. 696–712.
M. Adamkiewicz, T. Chen, A. Caccavale, R. Gardner, P. Culbertson, J. Bohg, and M. Schwager, “Vision-only robot navigation in
a neural radiance world,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 4606–4613, 2022.
Z. Kuang, K. Olszewski, M. Chai, Z. Huang, P. Achlioptas, and
S. Tulyakov, “Neroic: Neural rendering of objects from online
image collections,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02533, 2022.
A. Yu, V. Ye, M. Tancik, and A. Kanazawa, “pixelnerf: Neural
radiance fields from one or few images,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 4578–4587.
S. Duggal, Z. Wang, W.-C. Ma, S. Manivasagam, J. Liang, S. Wang,
and R. Urtasun, “Mending neural implicit modeling for 3d vehicle reconstruction in the wild,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2022, pp.
1900–1909.
A. R. Kosiorek, H. Strathmann, D. Zoran, P. Moreno, R. Schneider,
S. Mokrá, and D. J. Rezende, “Nerf-vae: A geometry aware 3d
scene generative model,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 5742–5752.
S. Yao, R. Zhong, Y. Yan, G. Zhai, and X. Yang, “Dfa-nerf: Personalized talking head generation via disentangled face attributes
neural rendering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00791, 2022.

[215]

[216]
[217]

[218]

[219]
[220]

[221]

[222]
[223]
[224]

[225]

[226]
[227]

[228]

[229]
[230]
[231]

[232]

[233]

[234]

M. Niemeyer and A. Geiger, “Giraffe: Representing scenes as
compositional generative neural feature fields,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 11 453–11 464.
Y. Liu, Y.-S. Wei, H. Yan, G.-B. Li, and L. Lin, “Causal reasoning meets visual representation learning: A prospective study,”
Machine Intelligence Research, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 485–511, 2022.
Z. Hao, A. Mallya, S. Belongie, and M.-Y. Liu, “Gancraft: Unsupervised 3d neural rendering of minecraft worlds,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021,
pp. 14 072–14 082.
T. Park, M.-Y. Liu, T.-C. Wang, and J.-Y. Zhu, “Semantic image
synthesis with spatially-adaptive normalization,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 2337–2346.
X. Huang, M.-Y. Liu, S. Belongie, and J. Kautz, “Multimodal
unsupervised image-to-image translation,” in Proceedings of the
European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 172–189.
A. Mallya, T.-C. Wang, K. Sapra, and M.-Y. Liu, “World-consistent
video-to-video synthesis,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
Part VIII 16. Springer, 2020, pp. 359–378.
R. Martin-Brualla, N. Radwan, M. S. Sajjadi, J. T. Barron, A. Dosovitskiy, and D. Duckworth, “Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance
fields for unconstrained photo collections,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 7210–7219.
Z. Zhang, S. Xie, M. Chen, and H. Zhu, “Handaugment: A
simple data augmentation method for depth-based 3d hand pose
estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00702, 2020.
G. Ning, G. Chen, C. Tan, S. Luo, L. Bo, and H. Huang, “Data
augmentation for object detection via differentiable neural rendering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02852, 2021.
Q. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Zhou, H. Wei, J. Yu, and Y. Zhang,
“An arbitrary scale super-resolution approach for 3-dimensional
magnetic resonance image using implicit neural representation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14476, 2021.
Q. Wu, Y. Li, L. Xu, R. Feng, H. Wei, Q. Yang, B. Yu, X. Liu, J. Yu,
and Y. Zhang, “Irem: High-resolution magnetic resonance image
reconstruction via implicit neural representation,” in International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, 2021, pp. 65–74.
L. Shen, J. Pauly, and L. Xing, “Nerp: Implicit neural representation learning with prior embedding for sparsely sampled image
reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10991, 2021.
M. Tancik, B. Mildenhall, T. Wang, D. Schmidt, P. P. Srinivasan,
J. T. Barron, and R. Ng, “Learned initializations for optimizing
coordinate-based neural representations,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 2846–2855.
D. B. Lindell, J. N. Martel, and G. Wetzstein, “Autoint: Automatic
integration for fast neural volume rendering,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 14 556–14 565.
K. Gupta, B. Colvert, and F. Contijoch, “Neural computed tomography,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.06574, 2022.
Y. Sun, J. Liu, M. Xie, B. Wohlberg, and U. S. Kamilov, “Coil:
Coordinate-based internal learning for imaging inverse problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05181, 2021.
K. Deng, A. Liu, J.-Y. Zhu, and D. Ramanan, “Depth-supervised
nerf: Fewer views and faster training for free,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2022, pp. 12 882–12 891.
Q. Wang, Z. Wang, K. Genova, P. P. Srinivasan, H. Zhou, J. T. Barron, R. Martin-Brualla, N. Snavely, and T. Funkhouser, “Ibrnet:
Learning multi-view image-based rendering,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 4690–4699.
O. Wiles, G. Gkioxari, R. Szeliski, and J. Johnson, “Synsin: Endto-end view synthesis from a single image,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2020, pp. 7467–7477.
A. Tewari, O. Fried, J. Thies, V. Sitzmann, S. Lombardi,
K. Sunkavalli, R. Martin-Brualla, T. Simon, J. Saragih, M. Nießner
et al., “State of the art on neural rendering,” in Computer Graphics
Forum, vol. 39, no. 2. Wiley Online Library, 2020, pp. 701–727.

32

[235]
[236]

[237]
[238]

[239]
[240]
[241]
[242]

[243]

[244]

[245]

[246]
[247]

[248]

[249]

[250]

[251]

[252]
[253]

[254]
[255]

C. Liu, X.-F. Chen, C.-J. Bo, and D. Wang, “Long-term visual
tracking: review and experimental comparison,” Machine Intelligence Research, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 512–530, 2022.
J. Xu, R. Zhang, J. Dou, Y. Zhu, J. Sun, and S. Pu, “Rpvnet: A deep
and efficient range-point-voxel fusion network for lidar point
cloud segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 16 024–16 033.
J. Choe, B. Joung, F. Rameau, J. Park, and I. S. Kweon, “Deep
point cloud reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11704, 2021.
P. Erler, P. Guerrero, S. Ohrhallinger, N. J. Mitra, and M. Wimmer,
“Points2surf learning implicit surfaces from point clouds,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2020, pp. 108–
124.
T. Hashimoto and M. Saito, “Normal estimation for accurate
3d mesh reconstruction with point cloud model incorporating
spatial structure.” in CVPR workshops, vol. 1, 2019.
A. Reed, T. Blanford, D. C. Brown, and S. Jayasuriya, “Implicit
neural representations for deconvolving sas images,” in OCEANS
2021: San Diego–Porto. IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–7.
——, “Sinr: Deconvolving circular sas images using implicit
neural representations,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing, 2022.
F. Vasconcelos, B. He, N. Singh, and Y. W. Teh, “Uncertainr: Uncertainty quantification of end-to-end implicit neural representations for computed tomography,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10847,
2022.
L. Shen, J. Pauly, and L. Xing, “Nerp: implicit neural representation learning with prior embedding for sparsely sampled
image reconstruction,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, 2022.
R. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Zhu, L. Tian, and U. S. Kamilov, “Recovery of
continuous 3d refractive index maps from discrete intensity-only
measurements using neural fields,” Nature Machine Intelligence,
vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 781–791, 2022.
C. Gan, Y. Gu, S. Zhou, J. Schwartz, S. Alter, J. Traer, D. Gutfreund, J. B. Tenenbaum, J. H. McDermott, and A. Torralba, “Finding
fallen objects via asynchronous audio-visual integration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2022, pp. 10 523–10 533.
R. Gao, Y.-Y. Chang, S. Mall, L. Fei-Fei, and J. Wu, “Objectfolder:
A dataset of objects with implicit visual, auditory, and tactile
representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07991, 2021.
V. Sitzmann, J. Martel, A. Bergman, D. Lindell, and G. Wetzstein,
“Implicit neural representations with periodic activation functions,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33,
pp. 7462–7473, 2020.
T. Chen, P. Wang, Z. Fan, and Z. Wang, “Aug-nerf: Training stronger neural radiance fields with triple-level physicallygrounded augmentations,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 15 191–
15 202.
J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Fu, X. Zhou, B. Cai, J. Huang, R. Jia,
B. Zhao, and X. Tang, “Ray priors through reprojection: Improving neural radiance fields for novel view extrapolation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 18 376–18 386.
S. Kulkarni, P. Yin, and S. Scherer, “360fusionnerf: Panoramic
neural radiance fields with joint guidance,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 7202–7209.
Y. Jiang, S. Jiang, G. Sun, Z. Su, K. Guo, M. Wu, J. Yu, and L. Xu,
“Neuralhofusion: Neural volumetric rendering under humanobject interactions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 6155–6165.
A. Mumuni and F. Mumuni, “Cnn architectures for geometric
transformation-invariant feature representation in computer vision: a review,” SN Computer Science, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 1–23, 2021.
L. A. Gatys, A. S. Ecker, and M. Bethge, “Image style transfer
using convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp.
2414–2423.
——, “A neural algorithm of artistic style,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1508.06576, 2015.
K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.

[256]

[257]
[258]
[259]
[260]
[261]
[262]

[263]
[264]

[265]
[266]

[267]
[268]

[269]
[270]
[271]
[272]

[273]
[274]
[275]
[276]
[277]
[278]
[279]

H. Huang, H. Wang, W. Luo, L. Ma, W. Jiang, X. Zhu, Z. Li, and
W. Liu, “Real-time neural style transfer for videos,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2017, pp. 783–791.
M. Ruder, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox, “Artistic style transfer for
videos and spherical images,” International Journal of Computer
Vision, vol. 126, no. 11, pp. 1199–1219, 2018.
——, “Artistic style transfer for videos,” in German conference on
pattern recognition. Springer, 2016, pp. 26–36.
D. Chen, L. Yuan, J. Liao, N. Yu, and G. Hua, “Stereoscopic neural
style transfer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 6654–6663.
C. Do, “3d image augmentation using neural style transfer and
generative adversarial networks,” in Applications of Digital Image
Processing XLIII, vol. 11510. SPIE, 2020, pp. 707–718.
X. Zheng, T. Chalasani, K. Ghosal, S. Lutz, and A. Smolic,
“Stada: Style transfer as data augmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.01056, 2019.
I. Darma, N. Suciati, and D. Siahaan, “Neural style transfer and
geometric transformations for data augmentation on balinese
carving recognition using mobilenet,” International Journal of Intelligent Engineering and Systems, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 349–363, 2020.
B. Georgievski, “Image augmentation with neural style transfer,”
in International Conference on ICT Innovations. Springer, 2019, pp.
212–224.
P. A. Cicalese, A. Mobiny, P. Yuan, J. Becker, C. Mohan, and
H. V. Nguyen, “Stypath: Style-transfer data augmentation for
robust histology image classification,” in International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2020, pp. 351–361.
Y. Xu and A. Goel, “Cross-domain image classification
through neural-style transfer data augmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.05611, 2019.
R. Geirhos, P. Rubisch, C. Michaelis, M. Bethge, F. A. Wichmann,
and W. Brendel, “Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves accuracy and robustness,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018.
S. Cygert and A. Czyżewski, “Toward robust pedestrian detection with data augmentation,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 136 674–
136 683, 2020.
A. Mikołajczyk and M. Grochowski, “Style transfer-based image
synthesis as an efficient regularization technique in deep learning,” in 2019 24th International Conference on Methods and Models
in Automation and Robotics (MMAR). IEEE, 2019, pp. 42–47.
P. T. Jackson, A. A. Abarghouei, S. Bonner, T. P. Breckon, and
B. Obara, “Style augmentation: data augmentation via style randomization.” in CVPR Workshops, vol. 6, 2019, pp. 10–11.
Y. Yi, “Microsoft extends airsim to include autonomous car
research,” 2020.
X. Huang and S. Belongie, “Arbitrary style transfer in real-time
with adaptive instance normalization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 1501–1510.
S. S. Kim, N. Kolkin, J. Salavon, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Deformable style transfer,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
Part XXVI 16. Springer, 2020, pp. 246–261.
X.-C. Liu, Y.-L. Yang, and P. Hall, “Learning to warp for style
transfer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 3702–3711.
S. Li, X. Xu, L. Nie, and T.-S. Chua, “Laplacian-steered neural
style transfer,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM international conference on Multimedia, 2017, pp. 1716–1724.
F. Luan, S. Paris, E. Shechtman, and K. Bala, “Deep photo style
transfer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 4990–4998.
R. R. Yang, “Multi-stage optimization for photorealistic neural
style transfer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2019, pp. 0–0.
Y. Li, M.-Y. Liu, X. Li, M.-H. Yang, and J. Kautz, “A closed-form
solution to photorealistic image stylization,” in Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 453–468.
B. Kim, V. C. Azevedo, M. Gross, and B. Solenthaler, “Transportbased neural style transfer for smoke simulations,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.07442, 2019.
——, “Lagrangian neural style transfer for fluids,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 52–1, 2020.

33

[280]

[281]

[282]

[283]

[284]

[285]

[286]

[287]

[288]
[289]
[290]
[291]
[292]
[293]
[294]
[295]

[296]
[297]
[298]

[299]

[300]

[301]
[302]

D. Chen, L. Yuan, J. Liao, N. Yu, and G. Hua, “Stylebank:
An explicit representation for neural image style transfer,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2017, pp. 1897–1906.
Z. Wang, L. Zhao, H. Chen, L. Qiu, Q. Mo, S. Lin, W. Xing, and
D. Lu, “Diversified arbitrary style transfer via deep feature perturbation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 7789–7798.
C. Castillo, S. De, X. Han, B. Singh, A. K. Yadav, and T. Goldstein,
“Son of zorn’s lemma: Targeted style transfer using instanceaware semantic segmentation,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE,
2017, pp. 1348–1352.
Z. Chen, W. Wang, E. Xie, T. Lu, and P. Luo, “Towards ultraresolution neural style transfer via thumbnail instance normalization,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 36, no. 1, 2022, pp. 393–400.
Y. Chen, Y.-K. Lai, and Y.-J. Liu, “Cartoongan: Generative adversarial networks for photo cartoonization,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp.
9465–9474.
Y. Li, C. Fang, J. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Lu, and M.-H. Yang,
“Diversified texture synthesis with feed-forward networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 3920–3928.
Z. Xu, T. Wang, F. Fang, Y. Sheng, and G. Zhang, “Stylizationbased architecture for fast deep exemplar colorization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2020, pp. 9363–9372.
D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V. Lempitsky, “Improved texture
networks: Maximizing quality and diversity in feed-forward stylization and texture synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 6924–6932.
S. Gu, C. Chen, J. Liao, and L. Yuan, “Arbitrary style transfer
with deep feature reshuffle,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 8222–8231.
V. Dumoulin, J. Shlens, and M. Kudlur, “A learned representation
for artistic style,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.07629, 2016.
E. Risser, P. Wilmot, and C. Barnes, “Stable and controllable neural texture synthesis and style transfer using histogram losses,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08893, 2017.
Y. Li, N. Wang, J. Liu, and X. Hou, “Demystifying neural style
transfer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.01036, 2017.
J. Yoo, Y. Uh, S. Chun, B. Kang, and J.-W. Ha, “Photorealistic style
transfer via wavelet transforms,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 9036–9045.
T. Yong-Jian and Z. Fan-Ju, “Neural style transfer algorithm
based on laplacian operator and color preservation,” Journal of
Computer Applications, p. 0, 2022.
S. Meyer, V. Cornillère, A. Djelouah, C. Schroers, and M. Gross,
“Deep video color propagation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.03232,
2018.
J. Fišer, O. Jamriška, M. Lukáč, E. Shechtman, P. Asente, J. Lu, and
D. Sỳkora, “Stylit: illumination-guided example-based stylization
of 3d renderings,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 1–11, 2016.
C. Rodriguez-Pardo and E. Garces, “Neural photometry-guided
visual attribute transfer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.02520, 2021.
L. Gatys, A. S. Ecker, and M. Bethge, “Texture synthesis using
convolutional neural networks,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 28, 2015.
E. Heitz, K. Vanhoey, T. Chambon, and L. Belcour, “A sliced
wasserstein loss for neural texture synthesis,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 9412–9420.
L. A. Gatys, A. S. Ecker, M. Bethge, A. Hertzmann, and E. Shechtman, “Controlling perceptual factors in neural style transfer,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 3985–3993.
S. d’Angelo, F. Precioso, and F. Gandon, “Revisiting artistic style
transfer for data augmentation in a real-case scenario,” in 2022
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE,
2022, pp. 4178–4182.
X.-C. Liu, X.-Y. Li, M.-M. Cheng, and P. Hall, “Geometric style
transfer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05471, 2020.
Y. Jing, Y. Mao, Y. Yang, Y. Zhan, M. Song, X. Wang, and D. Tao,
“Learning graph neural networks for image style transfer,” in

[303]

[304]

[305]
[306]

[307]

[308]

[309]
[310]
[311]

[312]

European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2022, pp. 111–
128.
J. Tremblay, M. Meshry, A. Evans, J. Kautz, A. Keller, S. Khamis,
C. Loop, N. Morrical, K. Nagano, T. Takikawa et al., “Rtmv: A raytraced multi-view synthetic dataset for novel view synthesis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07058, 2022.
A. Ahmadyan, L. Zhang, A. Ablavatski, J. Wei, and M. Grundmann, “Objectron: A large scale dataset of object-centric videos
in the wild with pose annotations,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp.
7822–7831.
T. Hackel, N. Savinov, L. Ladicky, J. D. Wegner, K. Schindler, and
M. Pollefeys, “Semantic3d. net: A new large-scale point cloud
classification benchmark,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03847, 2017.
X. Sun, J. Wu, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Zhang, T. Xue, J. B.
Tenenbaum, and W. T. Freeman, “Pix3d: Dataset and methods
for single-image 3d shape modeling,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp.
2974–2983.
Z. J. Chong, B. Qin, T. Bandyopadhyay, M. H. Ang, E. Frazzoli,
and D. Rus, “Synthetic 2d lidar for precise vehicle localization in
3d urban environment,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1554–1559.
J. McCormac, A. Handa, S. Leutenegger, and A. J. Davison,
“Scenenet rgb-d: Can 5m synthetic images beat generic imagenet
pre-training on indoor segmentation?” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 2678–2687.
X. Wang, K. Wang, and S. Lian, “A survey on face data augmentation for the training of deep neural networks,” Neural computing
and applications, vol. 32, no. 19, pp. 15 503–15 531, 2020.
P. S. Rajpura, H. Bojinov, and R. S. Hegde, “Object detection
using deep cnns trained on synthetic images,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.06782, 2017.
Z. Zhang, L. Yang, and Y. Zheng, “Multimodal medical volumes translation and segmentation with generative adversarial
network,” Handbook of Medical Image Computing and Computer
Assisted Intervention, pp. 183–204, 2020.
H. Turki, D. Ramanan, and M. Satyanarayanan, “Mega-nerf: Scalable construction of large-scale nerfs for virtual fly-throughs,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 12 922–12 931.

