International Journal of Computer Vision manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

arXiv:2401.03395v1 [cs.CV] 7 Jan 2024

Weize Quan 1,2 · Jiaxi Chen 1,2 · Yanli Liu 3 · Dong-Ming Yan 1,2,
Peter Wonka 4

·

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Image and video inpainting is a classic problem in computer vision and computer graphics, aiming to fill in the plausible and realistic content in the
missing areas of images and videos. With the advance
of deep learning, this problem has achieved significant
progress recently. The goal of this paper is to comprehensively review the deep learning-based methods for
image and video inpainting. Specifically, we sort existing methods into different categories from the perspective of their high-level inpainting pipeline, present
different deep learning architectures, including CNN,
VAE, GAN, diffusion models, etc., and summarize techniques for module design. We review the training objectives and the common benchmark datasets. We present
evaluation metrics for low-level pixel and high-level perceptional similarity, conduct a performance evaluation,
and discuss the strengths and weaknesses of representative inpainting methods. We also discuss related realworld applications. Finally, we discuss open challenges
and suggest potential future research directions.
Keywords Image inpainting · Video inpainting · Deep
learning · Generation

D.-M. Yan
yandongming@gmail.com
1

MAIS & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China
4
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science
and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Fig. 1: Application examples of inpainting techniques:
photo restoration (top left: image from (Bertalmio
et al., 2000)), text removal (top right: image
from (Bertalmio et al., 2000)), undesired target removal (bottom left: image from (Chen, 2018)), and face
verification (bottom right: image from (Zhang et al.,
2018c)).

1 Introduction
Image and video inpainting (Masnou and Morel, 1998;
Bertalmio et al., 2000) refers to the task of restoring
missing/occluded regions of a digital image or video
with plausible and natural content. Inpainting is an
underconstrained problem with multiple plausible solutions, especially if there are large missing regions. Inpainting has many important applications in multiple
fields, such as cultural relic restoration, virtual scene
editing, digital forensics, and film and television production, etc. Fig. 1 shows some important applications
of inpainting techniques. Video is composed of multiple
images exhibiting temporal coherence, therefore, video
inpainting is closely related to image inpainting, where
the former often learns from or extends the latter. For
this reason, we simultaneously review image and video

2

Fig. 2: The rough number of papers on image and video
inpainting per year.

inpainting in this survey, and the number of papers is
shown in Fig. 2.
Early image inpainting methods mainly depend on
low-level features of corrupted images, including PDEbased methods (Bertalmio et al., 2000; Ballester et al.,
2001; Tschumperlé and Deriche, 2005) and patch-based
methods (Efros and Leung, 1999; Barnes et al., 2009;
Darabi et al., 2012; Huang et al., 2014; Herling and
Broll, 2014; Guo et al., 2018). PDE-based approaches
usually propagate the information from the boundary
to create a smooth inpainting. It is possible to propagate edge information, but it is hard to inpaint textures. Instead of only considering the boundary information, patch-based approaches recover the unknown
regions by matching and duplicating similar patches of
known regions. For smaller areas, patch-based methods
can inpaint textures and also inpaint complete objects
if similar objects are available in other image regions.
However, these traditional methods have limited ability to generate new semantically plausible content, especially for large missing regions and missing regions
that are not similar to other image regions. A comprehensive review on classical image inpainting methods
is beyond our scope, and we refer readers to the surveys (Guillemot and Meur, 2014; Jam et al., 2021) for
more details.
By contrast, deep learning holds the promise to inpaint large regions and also inpaint new plausible content that was learned from a larger set of images. In the
beginning convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
generative adversarial networks (GANs) were the most
popular choices in the inpainting literature. CNNs are
a class of feed-forward neural networks that consist of
convolutional, activation, and down-/up-sampling lay-

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

ers. They learn a highly non-linear mapping from the input image to the output image. GANs are a type of generative model consisting of a generator and a discriminator that estimates the data distribution through an
adversarial process. Recently, more attention has been
paid to the transformer architecture and generative diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020). Transformers are a prevalent network architecture based on parallel multi-head attention modules.
Compared to the locality of CNNs, transformers have
a better ability for contextual understanding. Diffusion
probabilistic models are a type of latent variable model,
which mainly contain the forward process, the reverse
process, and the sampling procedure. Diffusion models
learn to reverse a stochastic process (i.e., diffusion process) that progressively destroys data via adding noise.
These deep learning-based image inpainting methods
can achieve attractive results that surpass traditional
methods in many aspects. From the perspective of the
high-level inpainting pipeline, existing inpainting methods can be classified into three categories: a single-shot
framework, a two-stage framework, and a progressive
framework. Orthogonal to these main approaches, different technical methods can be observed in their realization, including mask-aware design, attention mechanisms, multi-scale aggregation, transform domain, deep
prior guidance, multi-task learning, structure representations, loss functions, etc.
Compared with images, video data has an additional
time dimension. Therefore, video inpainting not only
fills in reasonable content in the missing regions for
each frame but also aims to recover a temporally consistent solution. Because of this close relationship between
image inpainting and video inpainting, many technical
ideas used in image inpainting are often applied and extended to solve video inpainting tasks. Traditional video
inpainting methods are usually based on patch sampling and synthesis (Wexler et al., 2007; Granados et al.,
2012; Newson et al., 2014; Huang et al., 2016). These
methods have limited ability to synthesize consistent
content and capture complex motion and are often computationally expensive. To address these shortcomings,
many deep learning-based methods have been proposed
and achieved significant progress. There mainly exist
four research directions: 3D CNN-based methods, shiftbased methods, flow-guided methods, and attentionbased methods. The core idea of these methods is to
transfer information from neighboring frames to the
target frame. 3D CNNs are the direct extension of 2D
CNNs and work in an end-to-end manner. However,
they often suffer from spatial misalignment and high
computational cost. Shift-based methods can address
these limitations to some extent, but within a limited

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

temporal window only. Flow-guided approaches can produce higher resolution and temporally consistent results
but are vulnerable to imperfect optical flow completion
due to occlusion and complex motion. Attention-based
methods fuse known information from short and long
distances. Unfortunately, inaccurate attention score estimation often leads to blurry results.
To our knowledge, there are several papers that review the deep learning-based inpainting works in the
literature. Elharrouss et al. (2020) categorizes image
inpainting methods into sequential-based, CNN-based,
and GAN-based methods, and reviews related papers.
To improve on their work, we also discuss common
methodological approaches, loss functions, and evaluation metrics. We also add more discussion about further
research directions and include newer work. Jam et al.
(2021) reviews the traditional and deep learning-based
image inpainting methods. However, they paid much
attention to the traditional methods but have significantly fewer deep learning-based works compared to our
survey. Weng et al. (2022) reviews some GAN-based image inpainting methods, but is generally shorter. Moreover, these existing surveys do not review the image
and video inpainting simultaneously.

2 Image Inpainting
For the restoration of missing regions in an image, the
results sometimes are not unique, especially for large
missing areas. Consequently, there mainly exists two
lines of research in the literature: (1) deterministic image inpainting and (2) stochastic image inpainting. Given
a corrupted image, deterministic image inpainting methods only output an inpainted result while stochastic image inpainting methods can output multiple plausible
results with a random sampling process. Inspired by
multi-modal learning, some researchers have recently
focused on text-guided image inpainting by providing
additional information with text prompts.

2.1 Deterministic Image Inpainting
From the perspective of a high-level inpainting pipeline,
existing works for deterministic image inpainting usually adopt three types of frameworks: single-shot, twostage, and progressive. The single-shot framework usually adopts a generator network with a corrupted image as input and an inpainted image as output; The
two-stage framework mainly consists of two generators,
where the first generator achieves a rough result and
then the second generator improves upon it; The pro-

3

Fig. 3: Representative pipeline of the single-shot inpainting framework. The generator takes as input the
concatenation of a binary mask and a corrupted image
and outputs the completed image. Training objectives
are used for training the generator.
gressive framework applies one or more generators to
iteratively recover missing regions along the boundary.
2.1.1 Single-shot framework
Many existing inpainting methods adopt a single-shot
framework, as shown in Fig. 3. It essentially learns a
mapping from a corrupted image to a complete image.
The framework usually consists of generators and corresponding training objectives.
Generators. To improve the inpainting ability of
the generator, there exist several lines of research: maskaware design, attention mechanism, multi-scale aggregation, transform domain, encoder-decoder connection,
and deep prior guidance.
(1) Mask-aware design.
The missing regions (indicated with a binary mask)
have different shapes and convolutional operations overlapping with these missing regions may be the source
of visual artifacts. Therefore, some researchers proposed
mask-aware solutions for classical convolutional operation and normalization. Inspired by the inherent spatially varying property of image inpainting, Ren et al.
(2015) designed a Shepard interpolation layer where the
feature map and mask both conduct the same convolution operation. Its output is the fraction of feature
convolution and mask convolution results. Mask convolution can simultaneously update the mask. To better handle various irregular holes and evolve the hole
during mask updating, Liu et al. (2018) proposed a
mask-guided convolution operation, i.e., partial convolution, which distinguishes between the valid region
and hole in a convolutional window. Xie et al. (2019)
proposed trainable bidirectional attention maps to extend the partial convolution (Liu et al., 2018), which
can adaptively learn the feature re-normalization and
mask-updating.
Different from the feature normalization considered
by previous methods, Yu et al. (2020) focused on the

4

mean and variance shift-related normalization and introduced a spatial region-wise normalization into the
inpainting network. Wang et al. (2020c) designed a visual consistency network for blind image inpainting.
They first predicted the damaged regions yielding a
mask, and then applied an inpainting network with
the proposed probabilistic context normalization, which
transfers the mean and variance from known features to
unknown parts building on different layers. Inspired by
filling holes with pixel priorities (Criminisi et al., 2004;
Zhang et al., 2019b), Wang et al. (2021c) used a structure priority (in low-resolution features) and a texture
priority (in high-resolution features) in partial convolution (Liu et al., 2018). Wang et al. (2021a) proposed
a dynamic selection network to utilize the valid pixels
better. Specifically, they designed a validness migratable convolution to dynamically sample the convolutional locations, and a regional composite normalization module to adaptively composite batch, instance,
and layer normalization on mask-based selective feature maps. Zhu et al. (2021) learned to derive the convolutional kernel from the mask for each convolutional
window and proposed a point-wise normalization that
produces the mask-aware scale and bias for batch normalization.
(2) Attention mechanism.
Attention is a prevalent tool to model correlation in
the field of natural language processing Vaswani et al.
(2017) and computer vision (Wang et al., 2018b; Fu
et al., 2019). Attention is better at accessing features
of distant spatial locations than convolution. In the literature, Yu et al. (2018) was the first to introduce a contextual attention mechanism to image inpainting. This
pioneering work inspired many following works. To enhance both visual and semantic coherence, Zeng et al.
(2019) proposed a pyramid-context encoder network
with an attention transfer method, where the attention
score computed in a high-level feature is used for lowlevel feature updating. Instead of using one fixed patch
size for attention computation, Wang et al. (2019b) proposed a multi-scale contextual attention model with
two different patch sizes followed by a channel attention block (Hu et al., 2018). Wang et al. (2020b) introduced a multistage attention module that performs
large patch swapping in the first stage and small patch
swapping in the next stage. Qin et al. (2021) combined
spatial-channel attention (Chen et al., 2017) and a spatial pyramid structure to construct a multi-scale attention unit (MSAU). This unit separately conducts spatial attention on four feature maps obtained by different
dilation convolutions and then applies augmented channel attention on concatenated attentive features. Zhang
et al. (2022e) proposed a structure and texture interac-

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

tion network for image inpainting. They designed a texture spatial attention module to recover texture details
with robust attention scores guided by coarse structures
and introduced a structure channel excitation module
to recalibrate structures according to the difference between coarse and refined structures.
In addition, some recent works proposed image inpainting networks based on vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Deng et al. (2021) proposed a contextual transformer network to complete the corrupted
images. Their network mainly depends on the multiscale multi-sub-head attention, which is extended from
the original multi-head attention proposed by (Vaswani
et al., 2017). Cao et al. (2022) incorporated rich prior
information from the ViT-based masked autoencoder
(MAE) (He et al., 2022) into image inpainting. Specifically, the pre-trained MAE model provides the features
prior to the encoder of the inpainting network and the
attention prior to making the long-distance relationship
modeling easier. Instead of using shallow projections or
large receptive field convolutions to sequence the incomplete image, Zheng et al. (2022a) designed a restrictive
CNN head with a small and non-overlapping receptive
field as token representation. Deng et al. (2022) modified multi-head self-attention by inserting a Laplace
distance prior, which computes the similarity considering the features and their locations simultaneously.
(3) Multi-scale aggregation.
In the literature on image processing, multi-scale aggregation is a common method to fuse information from
different resolutions. Wang et al. (2018c) designed a
generative multi-column inpainting network, consisting
of three convolution branches with different filter kernel sizes, to fuse multi-scale feature representations. To
create a smooth transition between the inpainted regions with existing content, Hong et al. (2019) proposed a deep fusion network with multiple fusion modules and reconstruction loss applied on multi-scale layers. The fusion module merged predicted content with
the input image via a learnable alpha composition. Hui
et al. (2020) proposed a dense multi-scale fusion module, which fuses hierarchical features obtained by multiple convolutional branches with different dilation rates.
Zheng et al. (2021b) designed a progressive multi-scale
fusion module to extract multi-scale features in parallel
and progressively fuse these features, yielding more representative local features. Inspired by the high-resolution
network (HRNet) for visual recognition (Sun et al.,
2019; Wan et al., 2021), Wang et al. (2021c) introduced
a parallel multi-resolution fusion network for image inpainting. This network can simultaneously conduct inpainting in multiple resolutions with mask-aware and
attention-guided representation fusion methods. Phutke

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

5

and Murala (2021) also followed a multi-path design,
where they introduce four concurrent branches with
different resolutions in the encoder. A residual module
with diverse receptive fields is designed as the building
block of the encoder. Cao and Fu (2021) proposed a
multi-scale sketch tensor network for man-made scene
inpainting. This network reconstructs different types
of structures by adding constraints on predicted lines,
edges, and coarse images with different scales. Different from the mask-blind processing (Li et al., 2020b;
Qin et al., 2021) of multi-scale features produced by
convolution with different dilation rates, Zeng et al.
(2022) carefully designed a gated residual connection,
which considers the difference between holes and valid
regions. They also proposed a soft mask-guided PatchGAN, where the discriminator is trained to predict the
soft mask obtained by Gaussian filtering.

gion to the missing regions with a guidance loss. Dolhansky and Ferrer (2018) introduced an eye inpainting network that merges the identifying information of
the reference image encoding as a code. Shen et al.
(2019) designed a densely connected generative network for semantic image inpainting. They combined
four symmetric U-Nets with dense skip connections.
Liu et al. (2020) introduced a mutual encoder-decoder
CNN, fusing the texture and structure features (from
the shallow and deep layers of the encoder), to jointly
restore the structure and texture with feature equalization. Similarly, Guo et al. (2021) designed a two-stream
image inpainting network, which combines a structureconstrained texture synthesis submodel and a textureguided structure reconstruction submodel. In addition,
they introduced a bi-directional gated feature fusion
module and a contextual feature aggregation module to
fuse and refine the resulting images. Feng et al. (2022)
inserted generative memory into the classical encoderdecoder network to jointly exploit the high-level semantic reasoning and the pixel-level content reasoning.
Based on (Liu et al., 2020), Liu et al. (2022) inferred
the texture and structure with a content-consistent reference image through a feature alignment module.

(4) Transform domain.
Instead of conducting image inpainting in the spatial
domain, some existing works designed inpainting frameworks in a transformed domain via the DWT (discrete
wavelet transform) (Daubechies, 1990) and the FFT
(fast Fourier transform). Wang et al. (2020a) recast the
image inpainting problem as predicting low-frequency
semantic structures and high-frequency texture details.
Specifically, they decomposed the corrupted image into
different frequency components via the Haar wavelet
transform (Mallat, 1989), designed a multi-frequency
probabilistic inference model to predict the frequency
content in missing regions, and inversely transformed
back to image space. Yu et al. (2021a) adopted a similar inpainting pipeline. For the multi-frequency completion, they proposed a frequency region attentive normalization module to align and fuse the features with
different frequencies and applied two discriminators to
two high-frequency streams. Li et al. (2021) extracted
high-frequency subbands as the texture and introduced
a DWT loss to constrain the fidelity of low- and highfrequency subbands. LaMa (Suvorov et al., 2022) combined the residual design (He et al., 2016) and fast
Fourier convolution (Chi et al., 2020) to construct a fast
Fourier convolution residual block, which is integrated
into the encoder-decoder network to handle large mask
inpainting. Lu et al. (2022) further improved LaMa by
introducing various types of masks and adding the focal frequency loss (Jiang et al., 2021) to constrain the
spectrum of the images.
(5) Encoder-decoder connection.
Some works modify the basic encoder-decoder architecture by introducing carefully designed feature connections. Shift-Net (Yan et al., 2018) modified the U-Net
architecture by introducing a specific shift-connection
layer, which shifts the encoder features of the valid re-

(6) Deep prior guidance.
To enhance the performance of the inpainting generator, some works have explored the deep prior from
a single image or a large image database. Lempitsky
et al. (2018) utilized a randomly-initialized generator
network as the prior to completing the corrupted image by only reconstructing the known regions. Gu et al.
(2020) proposed mGANprior by incorporating a pretrained GAN as prior for image inpainting. Specifically,
this method reconstructs the incorrupt regions while
filling in the missing areas by adaptively merging multiple generative feature maps from different latent codes.
Richardson et al. (2021) developed a pixel2style2pixel
(pSp) framework for image inpainting. They introduced
an encoder consisting of a feature pyramid and multiple
mapping networks to encode the damaged image into
extended latent space W+ (18 512-dimensional style
vectors), which is the extension of latent space W (Karras et al., 2019), and reused a pre-trained StyleGAN
generator as priors to achieve the complete image. To
handle the large missing regions and complex semantics, Wang et al. (2022b) designed a dual-path image
inpainting framework with GAN inversion (Xia et al.,
2022). Given a corrupted image, the inversion path infers the close latent code and extracts the corresponding multi-layer features from the trained GAN model,
and the feed-forward path fills the missing regions by
merging the above semantic priors with a deformable
fusion module. To guarantee the invariance of the valid

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

6

area in the corrupted and completed images, Yu et al.
(2022b) modified the GAN inversion pipeline (Richardson et al., 2021) by designing the mapping network with
a pre-modulation module and introducing F&W+ latent space, where F are the feature maps of the corrupted image.
Training objectives. The training objective is a
very important component of deep learning-based image inpainting methods. Pixel-wise reconstruction loss,
perceptual loss (Johnson et al., 2016), style loss (Gatys
et al., 2016), and adversarial loss (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) are the prevalent training objectives. The adversarial loss is obtained by a discriminator network.
Pathak et al. (2016) and Li et al. (2019b) adopted the
discriminator (stacked convolution and down-sampling)
from DCGAN (Radford et al., 2016). Considering Pathak
et al. (2016)’s method struggles to maintain local consistency with the surrounding regions, Iizuka et al. (2017)
proposed local and global discriminators, which generate more realistic contents. Yu et al. (2018) proposed
a patch-based discriminator, which can be regarded as
the generalized version of local and global discriminators (Iizuka et al., 2017). This patch-based discriminator is subsequently used in many following works. Liu
et al. (2021c) designed two discriminators with smalland large-scale receptive fields to guide the inpainting
network for fine-grained image detail generation.
Besides, researchers have also introduced some carefully designed losses. Li et al. (2017) introduced a semantic parsing loss for face completion. Yeh et al. (2017)
proposed context and prior losses to search the closest encoding in the latent image manifold for inferring
the missing content. Vo et al. (2018) proposed a structural reconstruction loss, which is the combination of
reconstruction errors in pixel and feature space. For explicitly exploring the structural and textural coherence
between filled contents and their surrounding contexts,
Li et al. (2019a) utilized the local intrinsic dimensionality (Houle, 2017a,b) in the image- and patch-level to
measure and constrain the alignment between data submanifolds of inpainted contents and those of the valid
pixels. To stabilize the training process of face inpainting, i.e., weakening gradient vanishing and model collapse, Han and Wang (2021) trained the generator via
neuro-evolution and optimized the generator’s parameters by mutation and crossover.
Some researchers introduced additional training objectives via multi-task learning. Liao et al. (2018a) presented a novel collaborative framework by training a
generator simultaneously on multiple tasks, i.e., face
completion, landmark detection, and semantic parsing.
To enhance the inpainting capability of the network for
image structure, Yang et al. (2020) designed a struc-

ture restoration branch in the decoder and explicitly
inserted the structure features into the primary inpainting process. Appropriate semantic guidance is a suitable tool for image inpainting (Song et al., 2018b), inspired by this, Liao et al. (2020, 2021b,a) proposed a
unified framework to jointly predict the segmentation
maps and recover the corrupted images. Specifically,
Liao et al. (2020, 2021b) designed a semantic guidance
and evaluation network that iteratively updates and
evaluates a semantic map and infers the missing contents in multiple scales. However, this method may create implausible textures and blurry boundaries, especially on mixed semantic regions. To solve this problem,
Liao et al. (2021a) devised a semantic-wise attention
propagation module to apply the attention operation
on the same semantic regions. They also introduced two
coherence losses to constrain the consistency between
the semantic map and the structure and texture of the
inpainted image. Zhang et al. (2020b) studied how to
improve the visual quality of inpainted images and proposed a pixel-wise dense detector for image inpainting. This detection-based framework can localize the
artifacts of completed images, and the corresponding
position information is combined with the reconstruction loss to better guide the training of the inpainting
network. Zhang et al. (2021) introduced the semantic
prior estimation as a pretext task with a pre-trained
multi-label classification model, and then utilized the
learned semantic priors to guide the inpainting process through a spatially-adaptive normalization module (Park et al., 2019). Yu et al. (2022a) jointly solved
image reconstruction, semantic segmentation, and edge
texture generation. Each branch is implemented with
a transformer network, and a multi-scale spatial-aware
attention block is developed to guide the main image
inpainting branch from the other two branches. Similar
to (Zhang et al., 2020b), Zhang et al. (2022d) first localized the perceptual artifacts from the completed image,
and then used this information to guide the iterative
refinement process. They also manually annotated an
inpainting artifact dataset.
2.1.2 Two-stage framework
Coarse-to-fine methods. This kind of method first
applies a generator to fill the holes with coarse contents, and then refine them via the second generator,
as shown in Fig. 4(a). Yu et al. (2018) modified the
generative inpainting framework with cascaded coarse
and refinement networks. In the refinement stage, they
designed a contextual attention module modeling the
long-term correlation to facilitate the inpainting process.

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

7

(a) Coarse-to-fine

(b) Structure-then-texture
Fig. 4: Two types of the two-stage inpainting framework: (a) coarse-to-fine (Yu et al., 2018) where the first network
predicts an initial coarse result and the second network predicts a refined result; (b) structure-then-texture (Nazeri
et al., 2019) where the first network predicts a structure map and the second network predicts a complete image.
An apparent difference between these two types is that the structure-then-texture methods explicitly predict the
structure map in the first stage.
Many later works refined different aspects of this
classical coarse-to-fine framework. Inspired by maskaware convolution (Liu et al., 2018) for irregular holes,
Yu et al. (2019) improved the previous network (Yu
et al., 2018) by introducing gated convolution that adaptively perceives the mask location. In the coarse stage,
Ma et al. (2019) proposed region-wise convolutions and
a non-local operation to process the discrepancy and
correlation between intact and damaged areas. PEPSI
Sagong et al. (2019) modified the two-stage feature encoding processes in (Yu et al., 2018) by sharing the
encoding network and organizing the coarse and fine
inpainting network in a parallel manner. PEPSI can
enhance the inpainting capability while reducing the
number of convolution operations and computational
resources. To further reduce the network parameters,
Shin et al. (2021) extended PEPSI by replacing the original dilated convolutional layers (Yu and Koltun, 2016)
with a so-called rate-adaptive version, which shares the
weights for each layer but produces dynamic features
via dilation rates-related scaling and shifting operations. The contextual attention proposed by (Yu et al.,
2018) has a limited ability to model the relationships
between patches inside the holes, therefore, Liu et al.
(2019) introduced a coherent semantic attention layer,

which can enhance the semantic relevance and feature
continuity in the attention computation of hole regions.
In (Yu et al., 2018), several dilated convolutions are
applied to enlarge the receptive field. Li et al. (2020b)
replaced the dilated convolution with a spatial pyramid dilation ResNet block with eight different dilation
rates to extract multi-scale features. Navasardyan and
Ohanyan (2020) designed a patch-based onion convolution mechanism to continuously propagate information from known regions to the missing ones. This convolution mechanism can capture long-range pixel dependencies and achieve high efficiency and low latency.
Wadhwa et al. (2021) proposed a hypergraph convolution with a trainable incidence matrix to generate
globally semantic completed images and replaced the
regular convolutions with gated convolution in the discriminator to enhance the local consistency of inpainted
images.
Due to the computational overhead and the lack of
supervision for the contextual attention in (Yu et al.,
2018), Zeng et al. (2021b) removed this attention block
and learned its patch-borrowing behavior with a socalled contextual reconstruction loss. Based on the insight that recovering different types of missing areas
need a different scope of neighboring areas, Quan et al.

8

(2022) designed a local and global refinement network
with small and large receptive fields, which can be directly applied to the end of existing networks to further
enhance their inpainting capability. Kim et al. (2022)
developed a coarse-super-resolution-refine pipeline, where
they add a super-resolution network to reconstruct finer
details after the coarse network and introduce a progressive learning mechanism to repair larger holes.
Some works adopt a coarse-to-fine framework to obtain high-resolution inpainting. Yang et al. (2017) designed a two-stage inpainting framework consisting of
a content network and a texture network. The former
predicts the holistic content in the low resolution (128×
128) and the latter iteratively optimizes the texture
details of missing regions from low to high resolution
(512 × 512). Song et al. (2018a) developed an imageto-feature network to infer coarse results, and then designed a patch-swap method to refine the coarse features. The swapped feature map is translated to a complete image via a Feature2Image network. In addition,
this framework can be directly used for high-resolution
inpainting by upsampling the complete image as the
input of refine stage with a multi-scale inference. Yi
et al. (2020) proposed a contextual residual aggregation mechanism for ultra high-resolution image inpainting (up to 8K). Specifically, a low-resolution inpainting result was first predicted via a two-stage coarseto-fine network and then the high-resolution result was
generated by adding the large blurry image with the
aggregated residuals, which are obtained by aggregating weighted high-frequency residuals from contextual
patches. Zhang et al. (2022c) focused on image inpainting for 4K or more resolution. They first fill the hole
via LaMa (Suvorov et al., 2022), predict depth, structure, and segmentation map from the initially completed image, then generate multiple candidates with
a multiply-guided PatchMatch (Barnes et al., 2009),
and finally choose a good output using the proposed
auto-curation network. To complete the high-resolution
image with limited resources, these methods first predicted the coarse content at the low-resolution level and
then refine the texture details at the high-resolution
level (sometimes with multi-scale inferences).
Other works also follow the basic coarse-to-fine strategy, but they are clearly different from the framework
proposed by (Yu et al., 2018). After obtaining the coarse
result with an initial prediction network, Li et al. (2019d)
applied a super-resolution network as the refinement
stage to produce high-frequency details. Roy et al. (2021)
predicted the coarse results in the frequency domain by
learning the mapping of the DFT of the corrupted image and its ground truth. Based on the insight that
patch-based methods (Barnes et al., 2009; He and Sun,

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

2012) fill the missing regions with high-quality texture
details, Xu et al. (2021) proposed a texture memoryaugmented patch synthesis network with a patch distribution loss after the coarse inpainting network.
Structure-then-texture methods. Structure and
texture are two important components of the image,
therefore, some works decompose the image inpainting
as the structure inference and the texture restoration,
as shown in Fig. 4(b). Sun et al. (2018b) designed a twostage head inpainting obfuscation network. The first
stage generates facial landmarks and the second stage
recovers the head image guided by the landmarks. Song
et al. (2019) first estimated the facial geometry including landmark heatmaps and parsing maps, and then
concatenated these results with a corrupted face image
as the input of the complete network to recover face
images and disentangle masks. Liao et al. (2018b) and
Nazeri et al. (2019) both proposed an edge-guided image inpainting method, which first estimates the edge
map for the missing regions, and then utilizes this edge
map prior to predicting the texture details. Similarly,
Xiong et al. (2019) explicitly disentangled the image
inpainting problem into two sub-tasks of foreground
contour prediction and content completion. To improve
the structural guidance of coarse edge maps, Ren et al.
(2019) introduced another representation of the structure, i.e., the edge-preserving smoothing via filtering
operation. Based on the structure reconstruction of the
first network, they inpainted missing regions using appearance flow. Shao et al. (2020) combined the edge
map and color aware map as the representation of the
structure, where the former is captured via the Canny
operator (Canny, 1986) and the latter is obtained through
Gaussian blur with a large kernel. For the specific Manga
inpainting, Xie et al. (2021) first completed a semantic
structure map, including the structural lines and the
ScreenVAE map (a point-wise representation of screentones) (Xie et al., 2020), using a semantic inpainting
network. Then, the completed semantic map is used for
guiding the appearance synthesis. Wang et al. (2021b)
designed an external-internal learning inpainting framework. It first reconstructs the structures in the monochromatic space using the knowledge externally learned from
large datasets. Based on internal learning, then, it applies a multi-stage network to recover the color information via iterative optimization. Besides the edge map
used in (Nazeri et al., 2019), Yamashita et al. (2022) incorporated the depth image to provide the boundaries
between different objects. Their method first completed
the masked edge and depth images separately and then
recovered the missing regions via an RGB image inpainting network taking as input the concatenation of
masked images, inpainted edges, and depth images. To

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

9

2.1.3 Progressive frameworks

Fig. 5: Progressive image inpainting. The image comes
from (Zhang et al., 2018a).

contain richer structural information, Wu et al. (2022)
choose the local binary pattern (LBP) (Ojala et al.,
1996, 2002), which describes the distribution information of edges, speckles, and other local features (Zhang
et al., 2010). In (Wu et al., 2022), the first network infers the LBP information of the holes, and the second
network with spatial attention conducts the actual image inpainting. Dong et al. (2022) utilized a transformer
to complete the holistic structure in a grayscale space
and proposed a masking positional encoding for large
irregular masks.
In addition, semantic segmentation maps are also
used as the proxy of structure (Song et al., 2018b; Qiu
et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021). Song et al. (2018b) introduced the semantic segmentation information into
the image inpainting process to improve the recovered
boundary between different class regions. They first
predict the segmentation map of missing regions via
a U-Net and then recover the missing contents with the
guidance of the above inpainted semantic map using the
second generator network. Song et al. (2018b) utilized
the pre-classification algorithm (Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher, 2004) to extract a semantic structure map.
After the completion of the semantic map, they employed a spatial-channel attention module to generate
the texture information. Zhou et al. (2021) first predicted the complete segmentation map via a segmentation reconstructor, and then recovered fine-grained
texture details with an image generator based on a relation network. The relation network is an extension of
SPADE (Park et al., 2019) to better modulate features
via spatially-adaptive normalization with the relation
graph.

Following the basic idea of traditional inpainting methods, some works have been proposed to exploit progressive inpainting with deep models. As shown in Fig. 5,
the progressive methods iteratively fill in the holes from
the boundary to the center of the holes, and the missing area gradually becomes smaller until it disappears.
Zhang et al. (2018a) formulated image inpainting as
a sequential problem, where the missing regions are
filled in four inpainting phases. They designed an LSTM
(long short-term memory) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997)-based framework to string these four inpainting phases together. However, this method cannot handle irregular holes common in real-world applications.
Guo et al. (2019) devised a residual architecture to
progressively update irregular masks and introduced
a full-resolution network to facilitate feature integration and texture reconstruction. Inspired by structureguided inpainting methods (Nazeri et al., 2019; Xiong
et al., 2019), Li et al. (2019c) proposed a progressive
reconstruction with a visual structure network to incorporate structure information into the visual features
step by step, which can generate a more structured image. Progressive inpainting methods have the potential
to fill in large holes, however, it is still difficult due to
the lack of constraints on the hole center. To handle
this drawback, Li et al. (2020c) designed a recurrence
feature reasoning network with consistent attention and
weighted feature fusion. This network recurrently infers
and gathers the hole boundaries of the feature map so
as to progressively strengthen the constraints for estimating internal contents. Zeng et al. (2020b) proposed
an iterative inpainting method with confidence feedback for high-resolution images. SRInpaintor (Li et al.,
2022a) combined super-resolution and the transformer
in a progressive pipeline. It reasons about the global
structure in low resolution, and progressively refines the
texture details in high resolution.
To this end, we organize the important and prevalent technical aspects for the network design, as shown
in Table 1.
2.2 Stochastic Image Inpainting
Image inpainting is an underdetermined inverse problem. Therefore, multiple plausible solutions exist. We
use the term stochastic image inpainting to refer to
methods capable of producing multiple solutions with
a random sampling process.
VAE-based methods. A variational autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2014) is a generative model
that combines an encoder and a decoder. The encoder

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

10

Table 1: The summary of important techniques for deep learning-based image inpainting.
Aspects

Blocks
Shepard interpolation (Ren et al., 2015)
partial convolution (Liu et al., 2018)
gated convolution (Yu et al., 2019)
priority-guided partial convolution (Wang et al., 2021c)
contextual attention (Yu et al., 2018)

Core idea
translation variant interpolation
convolution on valid regions
mask-aware convolution
adaptive gating
structure and texture priority
background patches with high
similarity to the coarse prediction
Attention
coherent semantic attention (Liu et al., 2019)
correlation between patches within the hole
multi-scale attention module (Wang et al., 2019b)
attention with two patch sizes
multi-scale attention uint (Qin et al., 2021)
attention with four different dilation rates
region normalization (Yu et al., 2020)
spatial and region-wise
probabilistic context normalization (Wang et al., 2020c)
transfer mean and variance
Normalization
regional composite normalization (Wang et al., 2021a)
batch, instance, and layer normalization
point-wise normalization (Zhu et al., 2021)
mask-ware batch normalization
frequency region attentive normalization (Zhu et al., 2021)
align low- and high-frequency features
global discriminator (Pathak et al., 2016)
entire image
local discriminator (Iizuka et al., 2017)
corrupted region
Discriminator
patch-based discriminator (PatchDis) (Yu et al., 2019)
eense local patches
conditional multi-scale discriminator (Li et al., 2020b)
PatchDis with two different scales
soft mask-guided PatchDis (Zeng et al., 2022)
central parts of the missing regions

learns an appropriated latent space and the decoder
transforms sampled latent representations back into new
data. Zheng et al. (2019) proposed a two-branch completion network, where the reconstructive branch models the prior distribution of missing parts and reconstructs the original complete image from this distribution. The generative branch infers the latent conditional prior distribution for the missing areas. This
framework is optimized by balancing the variance of
the conditional distribution and the reconstruction of
the original training data. Zheng et al. (2021a) extended
this work by estimating the distributions in a separate
training stage and introducing the patch-level shortlong term attention module. For stochastic fashion image inpainting, Han et al. (2019) decomposed the inpainting process as the shape and appearance generation. The network design for these two generation tasks
mainly adopts the VAE architecture. Based on a pretrained VAE on facial images, Tu and Chen (2019) first
searched for the possible set of solutions in the coding
vector space for the corrupted image, and then recovers possible face images with the decoder of the VAE.
Zhao et al. (2020) proposed an instance-guided conditional image-to-image translation network to learn conditional completion distribution. Specifically, they first
encode the instance and masked images into two probability feature spaces, and then design a cross-semantic
attention layer to fuse two feature maps. A decoder is
finally used to generate the inpainted image. However,
Han et al. (2019) and Zhao et al. (2020) often suffer
from distorted structures and blurry textures due to the
joint optimization of structure and appearance. Peng
et al. (2021) designed a two-stage pipeline, where the

first stage produces multiple coarse results with different structures based on a hierarchical vector quantized
variational auto-encoder, and the second stage synthesizes the texture under the guidance of the discrete
structural features.
GAN-based methods. GAN (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) learns the data distribution via an adversarial
process. A generator is applied to transform sampled
Gaussian random noise into image space and a discriminator is used to differentiate the real sample and
fake sample. Based on the premise that the degree of
freedom increases from the hole boundary to the hole
center, Liu et al. (2021a) introduced a spatially probabilistic diversity normalization to modulate the pixel
generation with diversity maps. Considering that minimizing the classical reconstruction loss hampers the
diversity of results, they also proposed a perceptual diversity loss that maximizes the distance of two generated images in the feature space. By combining the
image-conditional and unconditional generative architectures, Zhao et al. (2021) proposed a co-modulated
GAN for large-scale image inpainting. Technically, they
encode the incomplete input image into a conditional
latent vector, which is then concatenated with the original style vector of StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2020).
To enhance the diversity and control of image inpainting, Zeng et al. (2021a) applied the patch matching
from the training samples on the basis of coarse inpainted results. In particular, they designed the nearest neighbor-based pixel-wise global matching (from a
single image) and compositional matching (from multiple images). Inspired by CoModGAN (Zhao et al.,
2021), Zheng et al. (2022b) proposed a cascaded mod-

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

11

ulation GAN, which combines the global modulation
and the spatially-adaptive modulation in each scale of
the decoder, and replaces the common convolution with
fast Fourier convolution (Chi et al., 2020) in the encoder. To directly complete the high-resolution image,
Li et al. (2022b) proposed a mask-aware transformer
module with a dynamic mask updating as (Liu et al.,
2018). This module conducts non-local interactions only
using partially valid tokens in a shifted-window manner Liu et al. (2021d). Following (Chen et al., 2019;
Karras et al., 2019), they developed a style manipulation module for stochastic generations.

(1) Sampling strategy design.
Based on an unconditionally pre-trained denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) (Ho et al., 2020),
Lugmayr et al. (2022) modified the standard denoising
strategy by sampling the masked regions from the diffusion model and sampling the unmasked areas from
the given image. To preserve the background and improve the consistency, Xie et al. (2023) added an extra
mask prediction to the diffusion model. In the inference
stage, the predicted mask is used to guide the sampling
process.
(2) Computational cost reduction.
Instead of applying the diffusion process in pixel space,
Esser et al. (2021) utilized a multinomial diffusion process (Hoogeboom et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021) on
a discrete latent space and autoregressively factorized
models for the reverse process. These designs enable
ImageBART to generate high-resolution images, e.g.,
300 × 1800. Similarly, Rombach et al. (2022) proposed
a latent diffusion model (LDM) to reduce the training
cost of DMs while boosting visual quality, which can be
applied to the image inpainting task at a high resolution
of 10242 pixels. To overcome the limitation of massive
iterations in the diffusion model, Li et al. (2022c) proposed a spatial diffusion model (SDM) with decoupled
probabilistic modeling, where the mean term refers to
the inpainted result and the variance term measures
the uncertainty. Instead of starting with random Gaussian noise in the reverse conditional diffusion, Chung
et al. (2022) remarkably reduced the number of sampling steps with a better initialization by starting from
forward-diffused data.

Flow-based methods. Normalizing Flows (Tabak
and Vanden-Eijnden, 2010; Dinh et al., 2014; Rezende
and Mohamed, 2015) are a generative method that constructs a complex probability distribution by assembling a sequence of invertible mappings. Inspired by
Glow (Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018) and its conditional
extension (Lugmayr et al., 2020), Wang et al. (2022a)
proposed a conditional normalizing flow network to learn
the probability distribution of structure priors. Then,
another generator is applied to produce the final complete image with rich texture.
MLM-based methods. To produce a stochastic
structure in the missing region, Yu et al. (2021b) and
Wan et al. (2021) adopted a sequence prediction pipeline
based on a masked language model (MLM). Yu et al.
(2021b) proposed a bidirectional and auto-regressive
transformer as the low-resolution stochastic-structure
generator, which predicts masked token (missing regions) via a top-K sampling strategy during inference.
Then, a texture generator was applied to generate multiple inpainted results. Similarly, Wan et al. (2021) proposed a Transformer-CNN framework. They first apply a transformer training with MLM objective to produce a low-resolution image with pluralistic structures
and some coarse textures, and then utilize an encoderdecoder network to enhance the local texture details of
the high-resolution complete image.
Diffusion model-based methods. Diffusion models (DM) are emerging generative models for image
synthesis. Here, we only review diffusion model-based
inpainting methods, and we refer readers to the surveys (Yang et al., 2023; Croitoru et al., 2023) about a
comprehensive introduction to diffusion models. Generally, diffusion-based inpainting models employ a UNet architecture. The training objectives are usually
based on LDM = Ex,ϵ∈N (0,1),t [∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t)∥22 ], where
t = 1 . . . T , xt is a noised version of x, and ϵθ (·, t) is a
neural network. In the literature, existing works mainly
focused on the sampling strategy design and the computational cost reduction.

2.3 Text-guided Image Inpainting
Text-guided image inpainting takes an incomplete image and text description as input and generates textaligned inpainting results. The main challenge lies in
how to fuse the text and image semantic features, and
how to focus on effective information in the text. Zhang
et al. (2020a) proposed a dual attention mechanism to
obtain the semantic feature of the masked region by
finding unmatched words compared to the image and
applied DAMSM loss (Xu et al., 2018b) to measure the
similarity of text and image. Lin et al. (2020) introduced an image-adaptive word demand module that removes redundant information and aggregates text features in the coarse stage. They also proposed a textguided attention loss that pays more attention to the
reconstruction of the region affected by the text. Zhang
et al. (2020c) encoded text and image to sequential data
and exploited the transformer architecture to let crossmodal features interact. To ensure that the inpainted

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

12

Fig. 6: Representative examples of masks.
image matches the text, they took the masked text and
inpainted image as input to restore the text prompt. Wu
et al. (2021) incorporated word-level and sentence-level
textual features into a two-stage generator by introducing a dual-attention module. To eliminate the effection
of the background, the mask reconstruction module was
devised to recover the corrupted object mask. Xie et al.
(2022) applied multi-head self-attention as text-image
interactive encoder. They created a semantic relation
graph to compute non-Euclidean semantic relations between text and image, and used graph convolution to
aggregate node features. Li et al. (2023) followed a
coarse-to-fine image inpainting framework. They first
employed a visual-aware textual filtering mechanism to
adaptively concentrate on required words and then inserted filtered text features into the coarse network. Unlike (Zhang et al., 2020c), they directly reconstructed
text descriptions from inpainted images to guarantee
multi-modal semantic alignment. To better preserve the
non-defective regions during the text guidance, Ni et al.
(2023) proposed a defect-free VQGAN to control receptive spreading and a sequence-to-sequence module to
enable visual-language learning from multiple different
perspectives, including text descriptions, low-level pixels, and high-level tokens. Recent methods are based on
diffusion models.Shukla et al. (2023) focused on how to
generate a high-quality text prompt to guide a textto-image model-based inpainting network by analyzing inter-object relationships. They first constructed a
scene graph based on object detector outputs and ex-

panded it via a graph convolution network to obtain
the features of the corrupted node. Finally, the generated text prompt and masked image were fed to the
diffusion model to obtain the inpainted result. Wang
et al. (2023) found that object masks would force the
inpainted images to rely more on text descriptions instead of the random mask. Then, they proposed Imagen
Editor fine-tuned from Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022b)
with a new convolutional layer and designed an object
masking strategy for better training. To facilitate the
systematic evaluation of text-guided image inpainting,
they established a benchmark called EditBench.

2.4 Inpainting Mask
In the development of image inpainting techniques, various artificial masks have been introduced. These masks
can be roughly divided into two categories: regular masks
and irregular masks. Fig. 6 summarizes these masks,
where white pixels indicate missing regions.
Regular masks. A square hole that blocks the center area or random location are generally easier to construct. Lugmayr et al. (2022) introduced more regular
masks, including Super-Resolution 2× (reserving pixels
with a stride of 2), Alternating lines (removing every
second row), Expand (leaving a small center crop of the
input image), and Half (masking the half of the input
image).

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

13

Irregular masks. Letter masks ((Bertalmio et al.,
2000; Bian et al., 2022)) and object-shaped masks ((Criminisi et al., 2004; Yi et al., 2020)) are particularly designed for specific tasks, for example, caption removal
and object removal. Liu et al. (2018) introduced freeform masks, where the former collected random streaks
and arbitrary holes from the results of the occlusion/disocclusion mask estimation method. The irregular masks
shared by (Liu et al., 2018) are very common in the
existing inpainting methods. Suvorov et al. (2022) further split free-form masks into narrow masks, large wide
masks, and large box masks, where two types of large
masks are generated via an aggressive mask method
sampling polygonal chains with a high random width
and rectangles of random aspect ratios, respectively.

Total-variation loss. Total-variation loss can be
applied to ameliorate the potential checkerboard artifacts introduced by the perceptual loss. The formulation is:
Ltv = ||Imer (i, j + 1) − Imer (i, j)||1
+||Imer (i + 1, j) − Imer (i, j)||1 .

(4)

where Imer = Iout ⊙ M + Igt ⊙ (1 − M) is the merged
(completed) image.
Feature consistency loss. This loss constrains extracted feature maps of the prediction with guidance
from ground truth images:
X

Lf c =

||Φm (Iin )y − Φn (Igt )y ||22 .

(5)

y∈Ω

2.5 Loss Functions
For image inpainting, the loss functions affect features
of different sizes. At the lowest level, a pixel reconstruction loss aims to recover the exact pixel values. We
further discuss the total-variational (TV) loss (Rudin
et al., 1992), feature consistency loss, the perceptual
loss (Johnson et al., 2016), style loss (Gatys et al.,
2016), and adversarial loss (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
As input, an inpainting network accepts an input
image Iin and a binary mask M describing the missing
regions (where 0 means the valid pixel and 1 means the
missing pixel). The output of the network is a complete
image Iout . The loss functions are formulated as follows.
Pixel-wise reconstruction loss. In the literature,
the pixel-wise reconstruction loss often has two types:
ℓ1 loss (Eq. (1)) and weighted ℓ1 loss (Eq. (3)). The key
point is how the valid and unknown regions differ in the
loss function. The detailed formulations are as follows,
Lwpr = ||(Igt − Iout )||1 .

(1)

where Igt is the ground-truth complete image.
1

||(Igt − Iout ) ⊙ (1 − M)||1 ,
sum(1 − M)
1
Lhole =
||(Igt − Iout ) ⊙ M||1 ,
sum(M)

Lvalid =

(2)

where ⊙ is the element-wise product operation, and
sum(M) is the number of non-zero elements in M.
Then the weighted ℓ1 loss is formulated as
Lpr = Lvalid + α · Lhole ,

(3)

where α is the balancing factor. It is well known that
the ℓ1 loss can capture the low-frequency components,
whereas it struggles to restore the high-frequency components (Isola et al., 2017; Ledig et al., 2017).

where Ω is the missing regions, Φm (·) is the feature
map of the selected layer in the inpainting network,
and Φn (·) is the feature map of the corresponding layer
in the inpainting network or pre-trained VGG models.
Φm (·) and Φn (·) must have the same shape.
Perceptual loss. The perceptual loss is first proposed in style transfer and super-resolution tasks. This
loss measures the semantic/content difference between
inpainted and ground-truth images, and thus encourages the inpainting generator to restore the semantics
of missing regions. The perceptual loss is computed in
high-level feature representations and is formulated as:

Lper =

X

||Ψi (Iout )−Ψi (Igt )||1 +||Ψi (Imer )−Ψi (Igt )||1 ,

i

(6)
where Ψi (∗) is the feature map of i-th layer in the VGG16/19 network (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014) pretrained on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Instead of using the common VGG network, Suvorov et al. (2022)
suggested using a base network with a fast-growing receptive field for large-mask inpainting and utilized the
pre-trained segmentation network (ResNet50 with dilated convolutions (Zhou et al., 2018)) to compute the
so-called high receptive field perceptual loss. Note that,
some works used 2-norm in Eq. (6) to compute perceptual loss.
Style loss. Similar to the perceptual loss, the style
loss also depends on higher-level features extracted from
a pre-trained network. This loss is applied to penalize the style difference between inpainted and groundtruth images, e.g., texture details and common patterns. Mathematically, the style loss measures the similarities of Gram matrices of image features, instead of

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

14

Fig. 7: Some examples of image inpainting datasets.
the feature reconstruction in the perceptual loss. The
detailed formulation can be written,
X
Lsty =
||Φi (Iout )−Φi (Igt )||1 +||Φi (Imer )−Φi (Igt )||1 ,
i

(7)
T

where Φi (·) = Ψi (·)Ψi (·) is the Gram matrix (Gatys
et al., 2016).
Besides using Gram matrices to model the style information, the mean and standard deviation of image
features are commonly used in style transfer (Huang
and Belongie, 2017; Deng et al., 2020). The formulation is written as,
X
Lsty mean =
||µ(Ψi (Iout )) − µ(Ψi (Igt ))||2

adversarial loss can be formulated as:
h
i
LD = EI∼pdata (I) max(0, 1 − D(Igt ))
h
i
+EImer ∼pImer (Imer ) max(0, 1 + D(Imer )) ,

(9)

where D(Igt ) and D(Imer ) are the logits output from
discriminator D. The objective function for generator
G can be denoted as:
h
i
LG = −EImer ∼pImer (Imer ) D(Imer ) .
(10)
Except for the above hinge version, other types of adversarial losses are also adopted: GAN (Goodfellow et al.,
2014), WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017), LSGAN (Mao
et al., 2017), etc.

i

+||µ(Ψi (Imer )) − µ(Ψi (Igt ))||2 ,
X
Lsty std =
||σ(Ψi (Iout )) − σ(Ψi (Igt ))||2

2.6 Datasets
(8)

i

+||σ(Ψi (Imer )) − σ(Ψi (Igt ))||2 ,
Lsty meanstd = Lsty mean + Lsty std ,
where µ(∗), σ(∗) are the mean and standard deviation, computed over spatial dimensions independently
for each sample and each channel.
Adversarial loss. GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014)
are widely used in many image generation tasks. They
employ an adversarial loss to force the output distribution to be close to the “real” distribution. The adversarial loss can counteract blurry results and enhance
the visual realism of the output image. Therefore, it
is often applied in GAN-based inpainting networks. To
compute the adversarial loss, a discriminator network
(D) is necessary, which interacts with the generator network (G). The hinge version (Lim and Ye, 2017) of the

In the literature, there are six prevalent and public
datasets for evaluating image inpainting. These datasets
cover various types of images, including faces (CelebA
and CelebA-HQ), real-world encountered scenes (Places2),
street scenes (Paris), texture (DTD), and objects (ImageNet). Several examples are shown in Fig. 7. The details of the datasets are described below.
– CelebA dataset (Liu et al., 2015): A large-scale face
attribute dataset that contains 10,177 identities, each
of which has about 20 images. In total, CelebA has
202,599 face images, each with 40 attribute annotations.
– CelebA-HQ dataset (Karras et al., 2018): The highquality version of CelebA (Liu et al., 2015) with
JPEG artifacts removal, super-resolution operation,
and cropping, etc. This dataset consists of 30,000
face images.

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

– Places2 dataset (Zhou et al., 2017): A large-scale
scene recognition dataset. Places365-Standard has
365 scene categories. The training set has 1,803,460
images and the validation set contains 18,250 images.
– Paris StreetView dataset (Doersch et al., 2012): This
dataset consists of street-level imagery. It contains
14,900 images for training and 100 images for testing.
– DTD dataset (Cimpoi et al., 2014): A describable
texture dataset consisting of 5,640 images. According to human perception, these images are divided
into 47 categories with 120 images per category.
– ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009): A large-scale
benchmark for object category classification. There
are about 1.2 million training images and 50 thousand validation images.

2.7 Evaluation Protocol
The evaluation metrics can be classified into two categories: pixel-aware metrics and (human) perceptionaware metrics. The former focus on the precision of
reconstructed pixels, including ℓ1 error, ℓ2 error, and
PSNR (peak signal-to-noise ratio), SSIM (the structural similarity index) (Wang et al., 2004), and MSSSIM (multi-scale SSIM) (Wang et al., 2003). The latter
pay more attention to the visual perception quality, including FID (Fréchet inception distance) (Heusel et al.,
2017), LPIPS (learned perceptual image patch similarity) (Zhang et al., 2018b), P/U-IDS (paired/unpaired
inception discriminative score) (Zhao et al., 2021), and
user study results. The detailed descriptions are given
in the following.
– ℓ1 error: The mean absolute differences between the
complete image (Ic ) and the ground-truth image
(Ig ).
– ℓ2 error: The mean squared differences between the
complete image and the ground-truth image.
– PSNR: It is mainly used to measure the quality of
reconstruction of the complete image. Its formulation is PSNR = 20 · log10 (255) − 10 · log10 (MSE),
where MSE is the mean squared error between the
complete image and the ground-truth image.
– SSIM: Instead of estimating absolute errors, SSIM
measures the similarity in structural information by
incorporating luminance masking and contrast mask(2µIc µIg +c1 )(2σIc Ig +c2 )
ing. It is written as SSIM = (µ2 +µ
2 +c )(σ 2 +σ 2 +c ) ,
1
2
Ic

Ig

Ic

Ig

where µ and σ refer to the average and the variance,
respectively; and c1 = 0.012 and c2 = 0.032 are two
variables to stabilize the division.

15

– MS-SSIM: Dosselmann and Yang (2011) illustrated
that SSIM is very close to the windowed mean squared
error and Wang et al. (2003) highlighted the singlescale nature of SSIM as a drawback. As an alternative, MS-SSIM embraces more flexibility for image
quality assessment. To compute the MS-SSIM, two
input images are iteratively processed with low-pass
filters and downsampled with a stride of 2 (in total, five scales). Then, the contrast comparison and
structure comparison are computed at each scale
and the luminance comparison is calculated at the
last scale. These measurements are combined with
appropriate weights (Wang et al., 2003).
– FID: The Fréchet inception distance compares two
sets of images. It computes a Gaussian with mean
and covariance (m, C) and a Gaussian (mg , Cg )
from deep features of the set of completed images
and the set of ground-truth images. Specifically, FID
is defined as FID = ∥m − mg ∥22 + Tr(C + Cg −
1
2(CCg ) 2 ).
– LPIPS: The distance of multi-layer deep features
of complete and ground-truth images. Let Fc , Fg ∈
RHl ×Wl ×Cl denote the channel-wise normalized features in the l-th layer, the LPIPS is given by LPIPS =
P 1 P
l
l
2
l Hl Wl
h,w ∥Wl ⊙ (Fchw − Fg hw )∥2 , where Wl ∈
RCl is the channel weight vector.
– P/U-IDS: The linear separability of complete and
ground-truth images in a pre-trained feature space.
Let ϕ(·) denote the Inception v3 model mapping
the image to the 2048D feature space, f (·) be the
decision function of the SVM, the P-IDS is formulated as P-IDS = Pr{f (ϕ(Ic )) > f (ϕ(Ig )}. Due to
the unpaired nature, U-IDS is obtained by directly
calculating the misclassification rate.
– User Study: FID, LPIPS, and P/U-IDS cannot be
able to comprehensively evaluate the visual quality
of complete images, therefore, a user study is often
conducted to complement the above metrics. User
studies typically let a human chooses a preferred
image among two (or multiple) images generated
from two (or multiple) competitors. Based on the
collected votes, the preference ratio is calculated for
comparison.

2.8 Performance Evaluation
2.8.1 Representative Image Inpainting Methods
We qualitatively and quantitatively compare some representative image inpainting methods: RFR (Li et al.,
2020c), MADF (Zhu et al., 2021), DSI (Peng et al.,
2021), CR-Fill (Zeng et al., 2021b), CoModGAN (Zhao

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

16

Dataset
Mask

M1

M2

CelebA-HQ
M3
M4

M5

M6

M1

M2

Places2
M3
M4

M5

M6

ℓ1 (%) †

RFR
MADF
DSI
CR-Fill
CoModGAN
LGNet
MAT
RePaint

1.59
0.47
0.60
0.79
0.48
0.46
0.83
-

2.47
1.30
1.65
2.15
1.38
1.28
1.74
-

3.58
2.40
3.08
3.95
2.66
2.38
3.00
3.37

4.90
3.72
4.80
6.01
4.28
3.72
4.52
-

6.44
5.26
6.83
8.33
6.20
5.27
6.30
7.47

9.47
8.43
11.11
13.18
10.53
8.38
9.98
-

0.83
0.80
0.88
0.78
0.72
0.68
1.07
-

2.20
2.18
2.42
2.17
2.05
1.89
2.53
-

3.93
3.96
4.48
4.02
3.83
3.51
4.48
4.96

5.83
5.91
6.75
6.11
5.89
5.33
6.69
-

7.96
8.10
9.32
8.46
8.27
7.41
9.20
10.01

11.37
11.68
13.82
12.43
12.58
10.86
13.70
15.27

PSNR ‡

RFR
MADF
DSI
CR-Fill
CoModGAN
LGNet
MAT
RePaint

36.39
39.68
37.68
35.67
39.56
40.04
38.44
-

31.87
33.77
31.74
29.87
33.15
33.99
32.62
-

29.07
30.42
28.39
26.60
29.41
30.54
29.21
28.38

26.87
27.95
25.88
24.29
26.62
27.99
26.70
-

25.09
25.99
23.91
22.53
24.49
26.01
24.72
23.16

22.51
23.07
20.87
19.70
21.16
23.12
21.78
-

35.74
36.17
35.40
36.35
37.00
37.62
35.66
-

30.24
30.37
29.47
30.32
30.82
31.61
29.76
-

27.24
27.17
26.15
26.96
27.35
28.18
26.41
26.04

25.13
25.00
23.91
24.63
24.92
25.84
24.09
-

23.48
23.31
22.19
22.85
23.05
24.05
22.30
21.72

21.33
21.10
19.75
20.50
20.43
21.69
19.81
18.99

SSIM ‡

RFR
MADF
DSI
CR-Fill
CoModGAN
LGNet
MAT
RePaint

0.991
0.995
0.992
0.988
0.994
0.995
0.993
-

0.976
0.984
0.976
0.965
0.981
0.985
0.980
-

0.957
0.967
0.951
0.931
0.960
0.968
0.959
0.952

0.932
0.945
0.918
0.890
0.929
0.945
0.931
-

0.902
0.917
0.877
0.842
0.891
0.917
0.897
0.867

0.834
0.848
0.778
0.729
0.792
0.849
0.814
-

0.983
0.984
0.982
0.985
0.987
0.988
0.983
-

0.952
0.953
0.945
0.954
0.957
0.963
0.948
-

0.911
0.910
0.892
0.909
0.914
0.925
0.898
0.892

0.862
0.859
0.832
0.855
0.860
0.878
0.839
-

0.805
0.800
0.763
0.794
0.796
0.823
0.772
0.750

0.699
0.690
0.636
0.675
0.671
0.714
0.645
0.606

MS-SSIM ‡

RFR
MADF
DSI
CR-Fill
CoModGAN
LGNet
MAT
RePaint

0.992
0.994
0.992
0.987
0.994
0.995
0.994
-

0.976
0.983
0.976
0.963
0.980
0.984
0.980
-

0.956
0.966
0.952
0.928
0.958
0.968
0.960
0.953

0.933
0.942
0.919
0.887
0.926
0.945
0.932
-

0.900
0.913
0.878
0.839
0.888
0.917
0.898
0.870

0.830
0.846
0.784
0.732
0.793
0.851
0.818
-

0.986
0.987
0.984
0.987
0.988
0.990
0.986
-

0.960
0.961
0.952
0.960
0.961
0.968
0.957
-

0.924
0.923
0.905
0.920
0.921
0.935
0.913
0.903

0.880
0.877
0.850
0.872
0.870
0.894
0.859
-

0.828
0.824
0.785
0.814
0.810
0.844
0.796
0.771

0.731
0.722
0.664
0.704
0.692
0.744
0.676
0.633

FID †

RFR
MADF
DSI
CR-Fill
CoModGAN
LGNet
MAT
RePaint

0.86
0.52
0.59
1.06
0.44
0.39
0.41
-

1.68
1.55
1.58
2.86
1.25
1.06
1.13
-

2.67
3.28
3.01
5.26
2.45
2.08
2.05
2.14

3.77
5.43
4.50
7.79
3.65
3.16
2.96
-

5.21
8.35
6.51
11.23
5.03
4.61
4.05
4.24

7.60
13.54
9.76
19.52
6.89
7.07
5.43
-

2.62
2.15
2.51
2.37
2.11
1.97
2.13
-

5.99
5.58
6.52
6.24
5.63
5.25
5.47
-

9.47
9.20
11.35
10.54
9.58
8.90
9.26
8.85

12.90
13.08
15.99
15.17
13.65
13.02
13.00
-

16.62
17.36
21.75
20.36
17.68
17.60
16.62
15.90

22.13
24.42
29.38
26.43
22.58
25.99
21.88
21.58

LPIPS †

Table 2: Quantitative comparison of several representative image inpainting methods on CelebA-HQ and Places2.
‡ Higher is better. † Lower is better. From M1 to M6, the mask ratios are 1%-10%, 10%-20%, 20%-30%, 30%-40%,
40%-50%, and 50%-60%, respectively. Because of the heavy inference time, we do not show the results of RePaint
for M1, M2, M4, and M6.

RFR
MADF
DSI
CR-Fill
CoModGAN
LGNet
MAT
RePaint

0.015
0.009
0.010
0.017
0.008
0.006
0.007
-

0.028
0.025
0.026
0.043
0.022
0.017
0.019
-

0.042
0.048
0.048
0.074
0.041
0.031
0.035
0.038

0.060
0.077
0.074
0.107
0.065
0.048
0.054
-

0.081
0.109
0.104
0.143
0.092
0.069
0.077
0.093

0.118
0.168
0.160
0.212
0.143
0.108
0.120
-

0.021
0.014
0.018
0.016
0.016
0.014
0.014
-

0.047
0.038
0.047
0.042
0.044
0.035
0.040
-

0.074
0.068
0.085
0.076
0.080
0.064
0.073
0.077

0.106
0.102
0.125
0.114
0.121
0.096
0.111
-

0.142
0.141
0.169
0.156
0.164
0.132
0.152
0.167

0.201
0.209
0.242
0.226
0.236
0.198
0.224
0.259

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

17

Fig. 8: Qualitative comparison of representative image inpainting methods on CelebA-HQ (the first three rows)
and Places2 (the last four rows).
Table 3: Model computational complexity statistics.
Model
#Parameter GPU Memory Infer. time
RFR
30.59 M
1.23 G
28.95 ms
MADF
85.14 M
2.42 G
15.59 ms
DSI
70.32 M
6.54 G
40.20 s
CR-Fill
4.10 M
0.96 G
9.18 ms
CoModGAN
79.80 M
1.71 G
42.24 ms
LGNet
115.00 M
1.52 G
13.59 ms
MAT
59.78 M
1.69 G
78.35 ms
552.81 M
4.14 G
6 min 30 s
RePaint

et al., 2021), LGNet (Quan et al., 2022), MAT (Li
et al., 2022b), RePaint (Lugmayr et al., 2022). The test
mask is from (Liu et al., 2018). Specifically, RFR follows a progressive inpainting strategy, MADF adopts a
mask-aware design, DSI generates stochastic structures

with hierarchical vq-vae, CR-Fill designs an attentionfree generator, CoModGAN embeds the known content
of corrupted images into style vectors of styleGAN2,
LGNet introduces local and global refinement networks
with different receptive fields, MAT designs a maskaware transformer architecture, and RePaint utilizes a
pre-trained unconditional diffusion model.
Table 2 reports the quantitative results of these advanced image inpainting methods on CelebA-HQ and
Places2 datasets. In this experiment, we use the irregular masks shared by (Liu et al., 2018) for the evaluation. From this table, we can find that MS-SSIM is
very close to SSIM in the CelebA-HQ dataset; MSSSIM is consistently higher than SSIM in the Places2
dataset and this phenomenon is more apparent for large
masks. The reason may be that face images are rel-

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

18

1%-10%
C
P

10%-20%
C
P

20%-30%
C
P

30%-40%
C
P

40%-50%
C
P

50%-60%
C
P

ℓ1 (%) †

16
percept
resnetpl
style
stylemeanstd
percept style
lsgan

0.46
0.45
0.45
0.48
0.46
0.47
0.47

0.57
0.57
0.59
0.59
0.59
0.60
0.59

1.26
1.24
1.25
1.33
1.27
1.30
1.30

1.53
1.53
1.58
1.60
1.60
1.63
1.61

2.34
2.30
2.32
2.47
2.39
2.43
2.42

2.81
2.81
2.88
2.97
2.96
3.00
2.97

3.63
3.58
3.60
3.85
3.75
3.79
3.76

4.25
4.26
4.35
4.53
4.51
4.58
4.52

5.14
5.08
5.10
5.45
5.35
5.40
5.33

5.93
5.95
6.06
6.37
6.34
6.42
6.34

8.37
8.33
8.35
8.86
8.80
8.83
8.67

9.07
9.11
9.21
9.78
9.75
9.84
9.72

PSNR ‡

16
percept
resnetpl
style
stylemeanstd
percept style
lsgan

40.03
40.14
40.12
39.63
39.91
39.78
39.71

38.74
38.77
38.56
38.36
38.38
38.20
38.40

34.13
34.19
34.18
33.65
33.89
33.74
33.73

33.17
33.17
33.03
32.71
32.81
32.60
32.78

30.76
30.81
30.80
30.24
30.42
30.31
30.39

29.92
29.91
29.83
29.37
29.49
29.30
29.50

28.27
28.31
28.29
27.72
27.85
27.76
27.91

27.67
27.65
27.61
27.07
27.20
27.01
27.18

26.29
26.33
26.31
25.74
25.83
25.76
25.96

25.88
25.85
25.83
25.22
25.35
25.20
25.35

23.23
23.23
23.23
22.71
22.72
22.68
22.95

23.28
23.25
23.26
22.62
22.70
22.58
22.72

SSIM ‡

16
percept
resnetpl
style
stylemeanstd
percept style
lsgan

0.995
0.995
0.995
0.995
0.995
0.995
0.995

0.991
0.991
0.991
0.991
0.991
0.990
0.991

0.985
0.985
0.985
0.983
0.984
0.984
0.984

0.973
0.973
0.972
0.971
0.971
0.970
0.971

0.969
0.970
0.970
0.966
0.968
0.967
0.967

0.946
0.946
0.945
0.940
0.941
0.940
0.941

0.948
0.949
0.948
0.943
0.944
0.943
0.944

0.911
0.911
0.909
0.902
0.903
0.901
0.903

0.921
0.921
0.921
0.913
0.914
0.913
0.915

0.867
0.866
0.865
0.853
0.854
0.852
0.854

0.847
0.847
0.848
0.834
0.835
0.834
0.839

0.767
0.765
0.764
0.746
0.747
0.745
0.746

FID †

16
percept
resnetpl
style
stylemeanstd
percept style
lsgan

0.56
0.53
0.52
0.42
0.44
0.40
0.54

4.74
4.64
4.62
3.91
4.21
3.98
4.26

1.57
1.51
1.47
1.13
1.21
1.13
1.57

13.74
13.41
13.23
10.67
11.42
10.91
11.72

3.31
3.20
3.11
2.25
2.38
2.26
3.34

26.55
26.13
25.60
19.65
20.54
19.76
21.54

5.38
5.22
5.13
3.38
3.65
3.42
5.57

40.79
40.35
39.08
28.87
29.68
29.12
31.21

8.37
8.18
7.99
5.00
5.36
5.07
8.85

57.49
57.22
54.75
39.09
39.59
39.28
41.80

15.18
14.63
13.81
7.90
8.55
7.87
16.03

86.51
88.10
83.93
57.00
56.38
57.07
60.01

LPIPS †

Table 4: Quantitative comparison of different loss functions on CelebA-HQ (“C”) and Paris StreetView (“P”). ‡
Higher is better. † Lower is better. “16” refers to Eq. (3) with α = 6, and the remaining loss settings both include
“16” (We omit it for simplicity). “percept” refers to Eq. (6) based on pretrained VGG16; “resnetpl” refers to
Eq. (6) based on the pre-trained segmentation network ResNet50, which is proposed by (Suvorov et al., 2022).;
“style” refers to Eq. (7); “stylemeanstd” refers to Eq. (8); “percept style” refers to Eq. (6) plus Eq. (7); “lsgan”
refers to Eq. (9) and (10). Different percentage numbers in the first row refer to the hole ratios, where a large
number implies large missing regions. Following the common setting, the test mask is from (Liu et al., 2018).
Mask
Dataset

16
percept
resnetpl
style
stylemeanstd
percept style
lsgan

0.011
0.010
0.009
0.007
0.008
0.006
0.009

0.016
0.015
0.015
0.011
0.013
0.011
0.013

0.032
0.029
0.027
0.018
0.021
0.018
0.028

0.048
0.045
0.044
0.031
0.035
0.032
0.036

0.063
0.057
0.052
0.033
0.037
0.033
0.054

0.091
0.086
0.083
0.056
0.062
0.057
0.066

0.102
0.092
0.083
0.052
0.055
0.052
0.086

0.142
0.134
0.126
0.086
0.092
0.087
0.098

0.144
0.129
0.116
0.073
0.076
0.074
0.123

0.197
0.185
0.174
0.120
0.125
0.122
0.135

0.222
0.200
0.174
0.117
0.119
0.118
0.196

0.298
0.279
0.259
0.186
0.189
0.188
0.208

atively regular and uniform compared to the natural
scene images in Places2, and thus the latter is more
sensitive to structural similarity with different scales.
Among these methods, MAT and RePaint have relatively superior FID, especially for large masks (> 30%),
while CoModGAN and LGNet perform better in PSNR.
For DSI, the inpainting performance on CelebA-HQ is
slightly better than that on Places2, and the possible
reason is that the structure of face images is easier to
model than diverse natural scene images. CR-Fill has
limited inpainting performance.

Fig. 8 shows the visual results of some representative image inpainting methods on CelebA-HQ and
Places2 datasets. MADF adopts a mask-aware design,
which can predict reasonable structures (the second and
third rows), but has limited ability for detail restoration. By contrast, MAT has better inpainting performance with mask-aware transformer blocks. Through
introducing local and global refinement with different
receptive fields, LGNet can perceive local details (the
black stroke in the first row) and global structure (the
second row). For large missing regions, RFR can recover the helicopter rotor blade (the fourth row) and

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

19

Fig. 9: Qualitative comparison of different loss functions on CelebA-HQ (the first two rows) and Paris StreetView
(the last two rows). “StyleMS” refers to “stylemeanstd”; “Per Style” refers to “Percept style”.

waterfall (the fifth row) with progressive inpainting.
With the help of the generative capability of the unconditional modulated model (StyleGAN2), CoModGAN
demonstrates relatively good inpainting performance
(the fourth and sixth rows). DSI can perceive the structure with hierarchical VQ-VAE (the third and fourth
rows). Based on the powerful generation ability of the
diffusion model, RePaint can correctly infer the missing
background (the sixth row) and the human body (the
seventh row). Interestingly, it may have an incorrect semantic prediction (a woman’s head in the waterfall of
the fifth row). Due to the implicit attention mechanism
and simple network, CR-Fill achieves comparatively inferior inpainted results, which is also consistent with the
quantitative comparisons as shown in Table 2.
In addition, we evaluate the computational complexity of the representative inpainting methods in terms
of the number of parameters, GPU memory of single image inference, and inference time on a GPU (the time of
a forward pass through the networks. The statistical results are shown in Table 3. CR-Fill implicitly learns the
patch-borrowing behavior without an attention layer,
its model is the smallest and thus needs less GPU memory and running time. Because RePaint is based on a
diffusion model, it has the largest number of parameters and a very long inference time. The GPU memory
and inference time of DSI are also very high. LGNet
follows a coarse-to-fine framework with local and global
refinement, therefore, the number of parameters is high.

The running time of MAT and CoModGAN is relatively
high because the former conducts many attention computations and the latter has multiple style modulations
with progressive growing. RFR and MADF are in the
middle.
2.8.2 Loss Functions
As summarized in Sec. 2.5, many loss functions have
been proposed for image inpainting. In this part, we
evaluate the effect of each loss term. We train an inpainting network with different loss settings on the CelebAHQ and Paris StreetView datasets. This network consists of two downsampling layers, 11 ResNet residual
blocks with dilation, and two upsampling layers. The
corresponding numerical results are reported in Table 4.
In the case of masks at 1%-10%, the SSIM values of different loss settings are (almost) the same for CelebAHQ and Paris StreetView datasets. The reason is that
different loss settings only have a slight impact on the
inpainting of very small missing regions. We can see
that pixel-wise reconstruction loss (“16”) provides the
baseline performance. After adding the perceptual loss
(“percept”), FID and LPIPS are improved. Compared
with “percept”, “resnetpl” achieves slightly better results, especially for the large mask. The style loss can
remarkably decrease the FID and LPIPS at the expense of PSNR and SSIM. In other words, there exists a trade-off between pixel-wise reconstruction loss

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

20

Fig. 11: Representative samples of text editing.
Fig. 10: Two representative examples of object removal.
2.9.1 Object Removal
and style loss, where the former focuses on low-level
pixel recovery, and the latter emphasizes visual quality. A similar finding is reported and studied in (Blau
and Michaeli, 2018). In addition, combining the perceptual loss with style loss (“percept style”) has a very
slight effect on the results compared to only style loss
(“style”). The style loss based on Gram matrix (“style”)
and style loss based on mean and standard deviation
(“stylemeanstd”) have comparable results. Comparing
with adversarial loss (“lsgan”), style loss (“style”) obtain significantly lower FID and LPIPS.
Fig. 9 illustrates the corresponding qualitative comparison. “16” fills the missing regions with smooth structures and textures. After introducing the content loss,
this phenomenon is slightly improved, for example, the
nose and mouth of the first row are better recovered
in column “Percept”. Compared with “Percept”, the
inpainted results of “Resnetpl” have slightly improved
visual quality, which is attributed to the perceptual loss
computation with higher receptive field (Suvorov et al.,
2022). We can find that the results of “Style” are significantly superior to the previous three columns, especially for the restoration of texture details. This is
consistent with the numerical results in Table 4. For
three settings with style loss, i.e., “Style”, “StyleMS”,
and “Per Style”, “Style” and “Per Style” are on par,
“StyleMS” is slightly worse. The performance of “LSGan” is in between “Percept” and “Style”.

2.9 Inpainting-based Applications
Image inpainting can be used in many real-world applications, such as object removal, text editing, old photo
restoration, image compression, text-guided image editing, etc.

Almost all image editing tools include the function of
object removal, which is directly accomplished with image inpainting. To illustrate the capability of several
current inpainting methods on the object removal application, we apply the respective trained models to remove objects from selected real-world images with different scenes, and the corresponding results are shown
in Fig. 10. The first row is generated by CNN-based
method (Suvorov et al., 2022) and the second one is inpainted by a transformer-based method (Zheng et al.,
2022a). These two methods can achieve visually realistic results, successfully removing the objects highlighted with shadow markers.
2.9.2 Text Editing
On social media sites, users often share their pictures
and also want to hide their personal information for
privacy. For real-time text translation applications in
smartphones, the original content needs to be replaced
with the translated version. These text editing-related
tasks can be solved via inpainting techniques. Fig. 11(a)
shows the results of text removal with the method proposed by (Quan et al., 2022), and Fig. 11(b) illustrates
two samples of text replacement from (Wu et al., 2019).
These results have a pleasing visual quality.
2.9.3 Old Photo Restoration
Photos are helpful to record important moments. Unfortunately, some photos are damaged over time, resulting in various missing regions. Image inpainting can be
used to recover these incomplete photos automatically.
It is difficult to collect paired training data for this task,
therefore, we synthesize old photos using the Pascal
VOC dataset Everingham et al. (2015) inspired by Wan
et al. (2020). Specifically, we collect some paper and

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

Fig. 12: Several representative examples of old photo
restoration.

21

Fig. 13: Two representative examples of image compression with inpainting. From left to right: input image,
sampling mask, sampled image, and reconstructed image. Images come from (Dai et al., 2020).

scratch texture images to simulate the realistic defects
in the old photos. To blend the above texture images
with the VOC images, we randomly choose a mode from
three candidates (screen, lighten-only, and layer addition) with a random opacity. In addition, some operations, e.g., random flipping, random position, rescaling,
cropping, etc, are also used for augmenting the diversity
of texture images. To this end, the paired samples of the
original VOC images and the corresponding blended results are used for training the inpainting network (Quan
et al., 2022). Fig. 12 shows several examples of old photo
restoration, where the inpainting method restores the
original appearance of old photos.

2.9.4 Image Compression
Image compression is a fundamental image processing
technique to reduce the cost of storage or transmission
of digital images. This technique mainly consists of two
stages: compression and reconstruction. The former reduces the data size to obtain a sparse image representation and the latter reconstructs the original image. Different from waveform-based methods, Carlsson (1988)
proposed a sketch-based method to obtain a sparse representation and reconstructed images via an interpolation process. Galić et al. (2008) introduced partial
differential equation (PDE)-based inpainting to image
compression, where image coding and decoding both
are based on edge-enhancing anisotropic diffusion. Recently, some researchers (Baluja et al., 2019; Dai et al.,
2020; Schrader et al., 2023) applied deep learning methods to generate the sampling mask and reconstruct the
image with an inpainting network. Fig. 13 shows several
examples of image compression with inpainting, where
the reconstructed images have good quality based on
adaptive sparse sampling with inpainting.

Fig. 14: Selected examples of text-based image editing.
Each group includes the input image with mask (red
transparent) and text prompts and edited results. Images come from (Xie et al., 2023).

2.9.5 Text-guided image editing
Image inpainting is a basic processing tool for image
editing. Recent generative models based on probabilistic diffusion have the powerful capability of text-toimage generation, which provides the potential for textguided image editing with diffusion model-based image inpainting approaches. For example, diffusion-based
SmartBrush (Xie et al., 2023) edited images with the
guidance of text and shape. Fig. 14 illustrates several
samples generated by SmartBrush. The first row adds
new objects and the second row replaces original objects with new contents. We can see that the edited
results have high visual realism and are consistent with
text prompts.

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

22

3 Video Inpainting
3.1 Method
Unlike images, videos have an additional temporal dimension which provides extra information about objects or camera movement. This information helps networks to obtain a better understanding of the context
of the video. Therefore, the video inpainting task aims
to ensure both spatial consistency and temporal coherence. Existing deep learning-based video inpainting
methods can be roughly divided into four categories: 3D
CNN-based approaches, shift-based approaches, flowguided approaches, and attention-based approaches. We
refer the readers to more conventional methods in (Ilan
and Shamir, 2015).

features to the current frame after shifting features. The
alignment process is based on estimated flow with a validity mask. Ouyang et al. (2021) applied an internal
learning strategy for video inpainting, which implicitly
learns the information shift from valid regions to unknown parts in a single video sample. They also designed the gradient regularization term and the antiambiguity loss term for temporal consistency reconstruction and realistic detail generation. Ke et al. (2021)
presented an occlusion-aware video object inpainting
method. Specifically, they completed the object shape
with a transformer-based network, recovered the flow
within the completed object region under the guidance
of the object contour, and filled missing content with an
occlusion-aware TSM after the flow-guided pixel propagation.

3.1.1 3D CNN-based Approaches
3.1.3 Flow-guided Approaches
To deal with the temporal dimension, researchers proposed 3D CNN-based approaches, which often combine
temporal restoration and image inpainting. Wang et al.
(2019a) proposed a two-stage pipeline to jointly infer
temporal structure and spatial texture details. The first
sub-network processes the low-resolution videos with a
3D CNN, and the second sub-network completes the
original-resolution video frames with an extended 2D
inpainting network (Iizuka et al., 2017). Inspired by
the gated convolution in image inpainting (Yu et al.,
2019), Chang et al. (2019a) proposed a 3D gated convolution and a temporal SN-PatchGAN for free-form
video inpainting. They also integrated the perceptual
loss (Johnson et al., 2016) and style loss (Gatys et al.,
2016) into the training objective. Hu et al. (2020) proposed a two-stage video inpainting network, where they
obtain a coarse inpainting result with a 3D CNN and
then fuse inpainting proposals generated by matching
valid pixels and pixels in coarse inpainting results.
3.1.2 Shift-based Approaches
Considering the high computational cost of 3D convolution, Lin et al. (2019) proposed a generic temporal shift module (TSM) to capture temporal relationships with high efficiency. This technique is extended
for video inpainting. Chang et al. (2019b) developed
a learnable gated TSM, which combines a TSM with
learnable shifting kernels and gated convolution (Yu
et al., 2019). They also equipped the 2D convolution
layers in SN-PatchGAN (Yu et al., 2019) with gated
TSM. However, TSM often leads to blurry content due
to misaligned features. To solve this, Zou et al. (2021)
proposed a spatially-aligned TSM (TSAM), aligning

Optical flow is a common tool to model the temporal information in videos, which is also applied to solve video
inpainting. Based on the completed flow, the missing
pixels in the current frame can be filled by propagating pixels from neighboring frames. Kim et al. (2019b)
modeled the video inpainting task as a multi-to-single
frame inpainting problem and proposed a 3D-2D encoderdecoder network VINet. This network includes several
flow and mask sub-networks in a progressive manner.
They also introduced the flow and warp loss to further
enforce temporal consistency. Chang et al. (2019c) proposed a three-stage video inpainting framework consisting of a warping network, an inpainting network, and
a refinement network. In the warping network, bilinear
interpolation is used to recover background flow without learning. Then the refinement network selected the
best candidate from two frames completed by warping and inpainting network to generate the final output. Zhang et al. (2019a) applied internal learning to
infer both frames and flow from input random noise
and used flow generation loss to enhance temporal coherence. Xu et al. (2019) proposed a flow-guided completion framework consisting of three steps. It first fills
the incomplete optical flow with stacked CNN networks,
then propagates pixels from known regions to holes with
inpainted flow guidance, and finally completes unseen
regions with an image inpainting network (Yu et al.,
2019). To reduce the over-smoothing in the boundary
regions during flow completion, they leveraged hard
flow example mining to encourage the network to produce sharp edges. To solve the same problem, Gao et al.
(2020) explicitly completed motion edges and used them
to guide flow completion. In addition, they introduced

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

a non-local flow connection to enable content propagation from distant frames.
These previous methods cannot guarantee the consistency of flow, and even small errors in the flow may
lead to geometric distortion in the video. Inspired by
this, Lao et al. (2021) transformed the background of a
3D scene to a 2D scene template and learned the mapping of the template to the mask in the image. Given
that the complex motion of objects between consecutive frames will increase the difficulty to recover flow,
Zhang et al. (2022b) introduced an inertia prior in flow
completion to align and aggregate flow features. To alleviate the spatial incoherence problem, they proposed
an adaptive style fusion network to correct the distribution in the warped regions with the guidance of feature
distribution in valid regions. Kang et al. (2022) offset
the weaknesses of the error accumulation of a multistage pipeline in flow-based methods by introducing an
error compensation strategy, which iteratively detects
and corrects the inconsistency errors during the flowguided pixel propagation.
The above hand-crafted flow-based methods restored
videos with high computation and memory consumption because these processes cannot be accelerated by
GPU. To speed up training and inference, Li et al.
(2022d) proposed an end-to-end framework. They propagated features based on completed flow in low resolution and used deformable convolution to decrease the
distortion caused by errors in flow. The temporal focal
transformer blocks were stacked to aggregate local and
non-local features.
3.1.4 Attention-based Approaches
The attention mechanism is often applied to model the
contextual information and enlarge the spatial-temporal
window. Oh et al. (2019) recurrently calculated the attention scores between the target and reference frames,
and progressively filled holes of the target frame from
the boundary. Lee et al. (2019) firstly aligned frames by
an affine transformation, and then copied pixels based
on the similarity between the target frame and aligned
reference frames. Woo et al. (2020) proposed a coarseto-fine framework for video inpainting. The first stage
roughly recovers the target holes based on the computed homography between the target and reference
frames, and the second stage refines the filled contents
with non-local attention. They also introduced an optical flow estimator to enhance temporal consistency.
Considering the motion of the foreground objects is diverse, the choice of reference frames becomes more important. While other methods take neighboring frames
or frames in a specific distance as reference frames, Li

23

et al. (2020a) dynamically updated long-term reference
frames after aggregating short-term aligned features.
Instead of a frame-by-frame inpainting strategy, Zeng
et al. (2020a) adopted a “multi-to-multi” mechanism to
fill in the holes in all input frames. Specifically, they proposed a spatial-temporal transformer network (STTN)
to compute attention in both spatial and temporal dimensions. Based on STTN (Zeng et al., 2020a), Liu
et al. (2021b) separated feature maps into overlapping
patches, enabling more interactions between neighboring patches. In addition, they modified the common
transformer block by inserting soft split and soft composition modules into the feed-forward network. Chen
et al. (2021) proposed an interactive video inpainting
method to jointly perform object segmentation and video
inpainting with user guidance. For network design, they
introduce a spatial time attention block to update the
target frames’ features with the reference frames’ features. Zhang et al. (2022a) designed a flow-guided transformer to combine the flow and the attention. They first
utilized the completed flow to propagate pixels from
neighboring frames, and then synthesized the remaining
missing regions with a flow-guided spatial transformer
and a temporal transformer.
These attention-based methods still suffer from blurry
content in high frequency due to mapping videos into
a continuous feature space. By learning a specific codebook for each video and using subscripts of code to
represent images, Ren et al. (2022) transformed videos
to a discrete latent space. Then a discrete latent transformer was applied to infer content in masked regions.
Table 5 summarizes the technical details of existing
video inpainting methods.
3.2 Loss Functions
Video inpainting is very close to image inpainting. Therefore, many loss functions for training image inpainting
networks are also applied to train video inpainting models, including reconstruction loss, GAN loss, perceptual
loss, and style loss. To complete the corrupted flow, two
losses are often used:
Flow loss. Similar to the image reconstruction loss,
the flow loss measures the difference between inpainted
flow and its ground-truth version, which is defined as:
Lf low = ||Oi,j ⊙ (Fi,j − F̂i,j )||1 ,

(11)

where F̂i,j is the inpainted optical flow from frame i to
frame j, Fi,j is the ground-truth flow estimated by pretrained flow estimation networks, e.g., FlowNet2 (Ilg
et al., 2017) and PWC-Net (Sun et al., 2018a), and Oi,j
denotes the occlusion map obtained by the forwardbackward consistency check.

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

24

Table 5: Summary of video inpainting methods. Like image inpainting, we also split existing video inpainting
approaches into three types according to the number of stages: 1) one-stage framework ( 1 ) usually designs
a generator to recover the missing contents for each frame; 2) two-stage framework ( 2 ) often consists of two
networks for different purposes; and 3) multi-stage framework ( m ) splits video inpainting into multiple steps.
Stage

3D CNN

Wang et al. (2019a)
Chang et al. (2019a)
Hu et al. (2020)

2
1
2

✓
✓
✓

Shift

Chang et al. (2019b)
Zou et al. (2021)
Ouyang et al. (2021)
Ke et al. (2021)

1
1
1
m

✓
✓
✓
✓

Kim et al. (2019b)
Chang et al. (2019c)
Zhang et al. (2019a)
Xu et al. (2019)
Gao et al. (2020)
Lao et al. (2021)
Zhang et al. (2022b)
Li et al. (2022d)
Kang et al. (2022)

1
m
1
m
m
2
m
1
m

✓
✓
✓

Oh et al. (2019)
Lee et al. (2019)
Woo et al. (2020)
Li et al. (2020a)
Zeng et al. (2020a)
Liu et al. (2021b)
Chen et al. (2021)
Zhang et al. (2022a)
Ren et al. (2022)

m
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

Attention

Method

Flow

Loss details
L1 loss GAN loss Perceptual loss Style loss TV loss Flow loss Warp loss

Category

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓
✓

✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓
✓
✓

Table 6: Quantitative comparisons of representative video inpainting methods on YouTube-VOS and DAVIS
dataset. ‡ Higher is better. † Lower is better. *: our results using the method described in STTN (Zeng et al.,
2020a), and numerical differences may be due to different optical flow models during evaluation.
Methods
VINet (Kim et al., 2019b)
DFVI (Xu et al., 2019)
LGTSM (Chang et al., 2019b)
CAP (Lee et al., 2019)
FGVC (Gao et al., 2020)
STTN (Zeng et al., 2020a)
FuseFormer (Liu et al., 2021b)
FGT (Zhang et al., 2022a)
ISVI (Zhang et al., 2022b)
E2FGVI (Li et al., 2022d)

YouTube-VOS
PSNR‡ SSIM‡ VFID† FWE(×10−2 )†

DAVIS
PSNR‡ SSIM‡ VFID†

FWE(×10−2 )†

29.20
29.16
29.74
31.58
29.68
32.34
33.16
32.11
32.80
33.50

28.96
28.81
28.57
30.28
30.24
30.67
32.54
32.39
33.70
32.71

0.1785 / 0.1880 / 0.1608*
0.2566 / 0.1640*
0.1824 / 0.1533*
- / 0.1530*
0.1779 / 0.1449*
- / 0.1336*
- / 0.1517*
- / 0.1509*
- / 0.1383*

0.9434
0.9429
0.9504
0.9607
0.9396
0.9655
0.9673
0.9598
0.9611
0.9692

0.072
0.066
0.070
0.071
0.064
0.053
0.051
0.054
0.048
0.046

Warp loss. This loss encourages image-flow consistency:
Lwarp = ||Ii − Ij (F̂i,j )||1 ,

(12)

where Ij (F̂i,j ) refers to the warped result of the frame Ij
using the generated flow F̂i,j through backward warping.

0.1490 / 0.1509 / 0.1859 / 0.1470 / - / 0.0858*
0.1451 / 0.0884*
- / 0.0875*
- / 0.0860*
- / 0.0856*
- / 0.0864*

0.9411
0.9404
0.9409
0.9521
0.9444
0.9560
0.9700
0.9633
0.967
0.9700

0.199
0.187
0.170
0.182
0.143
0.149
0.138
0.1095
0.1028
0.096

3.3 Datasets
For video inpainting, three common video datasets, i.e.,
FaceForensics (Rössler et al., 2018), DAVIS (Perazzi
et al., 2016) and YouTube-VOS (Xu et al., 2018a), are
used for training and evaluation.
– FaceForensics: A face forgery detection video dataset
consisting of 1,004 videos. Among them, 854 videos

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

25

Fig. 15: Qualitative comparisons of representative video inpainting methods on YouTube-VOS and DAVIS dataset.
The light blue mask highlights the corrupted regions. The first three columns are random masks and the remaining
two columns are object masks.

are used for training and the rest are used for evaluation.
– DAVIS dataset: A densely annotated video segmentation dataset contains 150 videos with challenging
motion-blur and appearance motions. For the data
split, 60 videos are used for training and 90 videos
for testing.
– YouTube-VOS dataset: A large-scale video object
segmentation dataset containing 4,453 video clips
and 94 object categories. The video clips have on
average 150 frames and show various scenes. The
original data split, i.e., 3,471/474/508, is adopted
for experimental comparisons.

3.4 Evaluation Protocol
Video contains many image frames, therefore, the two
most widely-used metrics in image inpainting (i.e., PSNR
and SSIM) are also used for video quality assessment.
In addition, there are two other video-specific metrics
(considering the temporal aspect), i.e., flow warping
error (FWE) Lai et al. (2018) and video-based Fréchet
inception distance (VFID) Wang et al. (2018a). The former evaluates the temporal stability of inpainted videos
and the latter measures the perceptual realism in the
video setting.
– FWE: The flow warping error between two consecutive video
is calculated as E(It , It+1 ) =
PN frames
n n
n
2
PN 1
M
||I
t
t − Ît+1 ||2 , where Mt is a bin=1
Mn
n=1

t

nary mask indicating non-occluded areas and Ît+1 is

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

26

the warped frame of It+1 . The non-occlusion mask
can be estimated by using the method Ruder et al.
(2016). Then, the warping error of a video is defined
as the average error over the entire frames, and the
PT −1
1
formulation is E = T −1
t=1 E(It , It+1 ).
– VFID: A variant of FID for video evaluation. Instead of using a pre-trained image recognition network, the spatiotemporal feature map of each video
is extracted via a pre-trained video recognition network, e.g., I3D Carreira and Zisserman (2017). Then,
the VFID is calculated following the same procedure
as the FID.

Fig. 16: Several representative examples of blind video
decaptioning produced by (Chu et al., 2021).

3.5 Performance Evaluation
In this section, we report the performance evaluation of
representative video inpainting methods.
Table 6 shows the numerical results on YouTubeVOS and DAVIS datasets. We use the evaluated masks
shared by (Liu et al., 2021b). Early video inpainting
methods based on 3D convolution (e.g., VINet (Kim
et al., 2019b)) and shift (e.g., LGTSM (Chang et al.,
2019b)) have relatively limited inpainting performance.
After introducing optical flow and attention mechanisms, the quality of video inpainting is remarkably improved. DFVI (Xu et al., 2019) generates the baseline
result with flow guidance, and FGVC (Gao et al., 2020)
achieves better performance by completing flow with
sharp edges and propagating information from distant
frames. ISVI (Zhang et al., 2022b) obtains more exact flow completion under the inertia prior, and thus
enhances the inpainting quality. STTN (Zeng et al.,
2020a) and FuseFormer (Liu et al., 2021b) both design
video inpainting frameworks through stacking multiple
transformer blocks with multi-scale attention and dense
patch-wise attention, respectively. FGT (Zhang et al.,
2022a) and E2FGVI (Li et al., 2022d) combine the flow
completion and transformer as a whole, and the end-toend pipeline as adopted by E2FGVI is slightly better.
Fig. 15 illustrates some inpainted results with different types of scenes and masks. From the first and second columns, we find that the flow-based pixel propagation methods, including FGVC, FGT, and ISVI, have
a good ability to recover the texture details and objects
with the guidance of neighboring frames. Through contextual correlation modeling, transformer-based video
inpainting methods, such as STTN, FuseFormer, and
E2FGVI, can complete the structure of objects, e.g.,
the window of a bus in the third column. Compared
to STTN, FuseFormer introduces more dense attention computation (with overlapping), which can help
the global structure recovery, e.g., the trunk in the
fourth column and the post in the last column. In the

fourth column, the coverage area is better filled with
the realistic grass texture by the ISVI method, which is
attributed to the more accurate flow completion compared to FGVC and FGT.

3.6 Applications
3.6.1 Blind Video Decaptioning
Blind video decaptioning aims to automatically remove
subscripts and recover the occluded regions in videos
without mask information. Kim et al. (2019a) designed
an encoder-decoder framework based on 3D convolution. They applied residual learning to directly touch
the corrupted regions and leveraged feedback connections to enforce temporal coherence with the warping
loss. However, this method often suffers from the problem of incomplete subtitle removal. Chu et al. (2021)
proposed a two-stage video decaptioning network including a mask extraction module and a frame attentionbased decaptioning module. Several examples produced
by (Chu et al., 2021) are shown in Fig. 16. The regions
originally covered by subtitles are filled with plausible
content.

3.6.2 Dynamic Object Removal
A common practical application of video inpainting technology is to automatically remove undesired objects,
which are static or dynamic at the time of recording.
In this part, we show two examples of dynamic object
removal with the recent video inpainting methods (Liu
et al., 2021b; Ren et al., 2022; Kang et al., 2022). As
shown in Fig. 17, the regions covered by dynamic objects can be filled with plausible content.

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

Fig. 17: Three examples of dynamic object removal
produced by FuseFormer (Liu et al., 2021b), DlFormer (Ren et al., 2022), and ECFVI (Kang et al.,
2022).

4 Future Work
Image and video inpainting essentially is a conditional
generative task, therefore, the common generative models, such as VAE and GAN, are often adopted by the existing inpainting methods. Currently, diffusion models
have become the most popular generative models with
powerful capability of content synthesis. DMs would
have the potential to improve the performance of image
and video inpainting and may attract a lot of research
effort in the future. For this promising direction, several
challenging problems need to be solved.
How to use large pre-trained diffusion models
(e.g., denoising diffusion) for image inpainting?
DMs synthesize an image by a sequential application
of denoising steps, which are conducted in pixel or latent space. For the inpainting task, the core idea is to
fill in the missing regions while preserving the originally valid content. Some researchers have made preliminary attempts, such as Palette (Saharia et al., 2022a),
Blended Diffusion (Avrahami et al., 2022), and ControlNet (Zhang and Agrawala, 2023), etc. One research
challenge is how to inject conditioning information into
the denoising processes of large pre-trained diffusion
models. Following the pipeline of diffusion models, they
need many iterations to generate the final image and
thus require a longer inference time compared to existing VAE- and GAN-based approaches. Another research challenge is to implement fast inpainting methods based on diffusion. Also, while video-based generative diffusion models are still in their infancy, it is
expected that large pre-trained video generation models will become available in the near future. Leveraging
these models for video inpainting will be an interesting
task once these models become available.
How to use large pre-trained models for joint
text and image embedding (e.g., the latest CLIP
style architecture) for image inpainting?

27

Mainstream inpainting methods are uncontrollable, where
the inpainted content is unknown in advance and sometimes this is undesired for users. Reference-based inpainting cannot fully satisfy this requirement. On the
other hand, recent studies (Rombach et al., 2022; Hertz
et al., 2022; Parmar et al., 2023) have shown that large
pre-trained diffusion models with massive text-image
pairs can synthesize high-quality images with rich lowlevel attributes and details. In addition, Zhao et al.
(2023) implied that such pre-trained DMs also contain
high-level visual concepts. As a result, text-guided inpainting based on the large pre-trained text-to-image
diffusion models would be able to fill the content under the control of users. The first problem is to design
the appropriate prompt exactly indicating the user’s
intention. It is also challenging to merge the image embedding from the user prompt with the corresponding
embedding of the input corrupted image. In addition,
text-based video inpainting will be a great avenue for
future work.
How to scale up training to datasets of 5B
images (e.g. LAION)?
Deep learning models are hungry for training datasets.
Currently, advanced diffusion models are pre-trained
on large-scale datasets containing millions or even billions of text-image data pairs. However, these models are mainly dominated by several industrial research
labs, where the datasets and training processes are not
transparent to the research community. Very recently,
the largest text-image dataset LAION-5B (Schuhmann
et al., 2022) containing 5.8 billion samples is publicly
available. In future work, it is worth designing efficient
methods for image and video inpainting that are trained
on such very large datasets directly.
How to utilize image data and pre-trained
image inpainting models to improve the models
of video inpainting? In addition to considering the
spatial aspect as in image inpainting, video inpainting
also needs to consider the temporal aspect. Therefore,
it is important and beneficial to transfer the inpainting
ability from image to video. A simple and direct solution is to take the result of image inpainting on each
frame as the initialization and then revise the spatial
and temporal consistency via carefully designed deep
models. Another possible research line is to take the
well-trained image inpainting models as the backbone
and aggregate the multiple frames in the feature space
with appropriate modules, such as deformable convolution or attention. It’s still worth exploring combining
the pre-trained image inpainting model with deep video
prior.
How to create a large video dataset of 5B
videos and leverage it for video inpainting?

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

28

Like image inpainting, taking advantage of large pretrained text-video diffusion models may be a new research direction for video inpainting. However, current
text-video DMs are trained on datasets with 10 million
captioned videos, which inevitably limits the generation
and generalization ability of DMs. One potential direction of future research is to collect large-scale text-video
datasets (e.g., 5B pairs) and design the pre-training
methods scaling up to this amount. As we all know,
video inpainting is more difficult compared to its image
counterpart. Therefore, it is valuable to spend time on
all aspects of large video datasets: building large publicly available video datasets, generating large diffusion
methods for video synthesis and using these pre-trained
methods for video inpainting, and separately designing
and training large-scale video architectures directly.

5 Concluding Remarks
The prevalence of visual data, including images and
video, promotes the development of related processing
technologies, e.g., image and video inpainting. Due to
their practical applications in many fields, these techniques have attracted great attention from both the industrial and research communities over the past decade.
We presented a review of deep learning-based methods
for image and video inpainting. Specifically, we outline different aspects of the research, including a taxonomy of existing methods, training objectives, benchmark datasets, evaluation protocols, performance evaluation, and real-world applications. Future research directions are also discussed.
Although current deep learning-based inpainting approaches have achieved remarkable performance improvement, there are still several limitations: (1) Uncertainty
of artifacts. The results generated by inpainting methods often exhibit visual artifacts, which are difficult to
predict and prevent. There is almost no research work
to systematically and comprehensively study these artifacts. (2) Specificity. Current inpainting models are
usually trained on specific datasets, for example, face
images or natural scene images. In other words, models
trained on face images have bad predictions on natural scene images, and vice versa. Not enough models are trained on large scale datasets such as LIAON.
(3) Large-scale inpainting. Current advanced inpainting
methods still have limited performance on large-scale
missing regions. Many methods are based on attention
mechanisms, which are more fragile in large-scale scenarios. (4) High training costs. Current deep learningbased inpainting methods often need one or more weeks
on multiple GPUs, which places very high demands on

resource consumption. (5) Long inference time. Diffusion model-based methods can achieve better inpainting
performance, however, they need a very long running
time, which limits the application scope of inpainting
techniques.
Deep image/video inpainting techniques have a wide
range of real-world applications, however, they also raise
potential ethical issues that need to be carefully considered and addressed: (1) Security risks. Inpaintingbased visual data editing, e.g., object removal, may
maliciously be exploited, such as tampering with visual
data or altering evidence. (2) Ownership and copyright.
When there is no appropriate authorization, deep inpainting techniques used to manipulate and enhance
images/videos could raise questions about ownership
and copyright. The inpainting result may strongly resemble or be strongly inspired by copyrighted material.
(3) Historical accuracy. Inpainting methods can be used
for the restoration of old photos/films or artworks. This
process could raise risks of inadvertently changing the
initial creative intention or historical accuracy of the
content, which requires careful verification by domain
experts. (4) Bias. If not properly trained, an inpainting model may introduce bias or unfairness, especially
when the training data is biased or unrepresentative.
This has the potential to perpetuate social prejudices
or inaccurately portray certain groups.

References
Arjovsky M, Chintala S, Bottou L (2017) Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks. In: Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., vol 70, pp 214–223
Austin J, Johnson DD, Ho J, Tarlow D, van den Berg R
(2021) Structured Denoising Diffusion Models in Discrete State-Spaces. In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., vol 34, pp 17981–17993
Avrahami O, Lischinski D, Fried O (2022) Blended Diffusion for Text-Driven Editing of Natural Images. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 18208–
18218
Ballester C, Bertalmio M, Caselles V, Sapiro G, Verdera
J (2001) Filling-in by joint interpolation of vector
fields and gray levels. IEEE Trans Image Process
10(8):1200–1211
Baluja S, Marwood D, Johnston N, Covell M (2019)
Learning to Render Better Image Previews. In: IEEE
Int. Conf. Image Process., pp 1700–1704
Barnes C, Shechtman E, Finkelstein A, Goldman DB
(2009) PatchMatch: A randomized correspondence
algorithm for structural image editing. ACM Trans
Graph 28(3):24

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

29

Bertalmio M, Sapiro G, Caselles V, Ballester C (2000)
Image inpainting. In: Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH, pp
417–424
Bian X, Wang C, Quan W, Ye J, Zhang X, Yan DM
(2022) Scene text removal via cascaded text stroke
detection and erasing. Computational Visual Media
8:273–287
Blau Y, Michaeli T (2018) The Perception-Distortion
Tradeoff. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 6228–6237
Canny J (1986) A computational approach to edge
detection. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell
(6):679–698
Cao C, Fu Y (2021) Learning a Sketch Tensor Space
for Image Inpainting of Man-Made Scenes. In: Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 14509–14518
Cao C, Dong Q, Fu Y (2022) Learning Prior Feature
and Attention Enhanced Image Inpainting. In: Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis.
Carlsson S (1988) Sketch based coding of grey level images. Sign Process 15(1):57–83
Carreira J, Zisserman A (2017) Quo Vadis, Action
Recognition? A New Model and the Kinetics Dataset.
In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp
4724–4733
Chang YL, Liu ZY, Lee KY, Hsu W (2019a) Freeform video inpainting with 3d gated convolution and
temporal patchgan. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp
9066–9075
Chang YL, Liu ZY, Lee KY, Hsu W (2019b) Learnable
gated temporal shift module for deep video inpainting. In: Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf.
Chang YL, Yu Liu Z, Hsu W (2019c) Vornet: Spatiotemporally consistent video inpainting for object removal. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.
Worksh., pp 1785–1794
Chen C, Cai J, Hu Y, Tang X, Wang X, Yuan C, Bai
X, Bai S (2021) Deep Interactive Video Inpainting:
An Invisibility Cloak for Harry Potter. In: ACM Int.
Conf. Multimedia, p 862–870
Chen L, Zhang H, Xiao J, Nie L, Shao J, Liu W,
Chua TS (2017) SCA-CNN: Spatial and ChannelWise Attention in Convolutional Networks for Image
Captioning. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 6298–6306
Chen P (2018) Video retouch: Object removal.
http://www.12371.cn/2021/02/08/
ARTI1612745858192472.shtml
Chen T, Lucic M, Houlsby N, Gelly S (2019) On Self
Modulation for Generative Adversarial Networks. In:
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
Chi L, Jiang B, Mu Y (2020) Fast Fourier Convolution.
In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol 33, pp

4479–4488
Chu P, Quan W, Wang T, Wang P, Ren P, Yan DM
(2021) Deep video decaptioning. In: Brit. Mach. Vis.
Conf.
Chung H, Sim B, Ye JC (2022) Come-Closer-DiffuseFaster: Accelerating Conditional Diffusion Models for
Inverse Problems through Stochastic Contraction. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 12403–
12412
Cimpoi M, Maji S, Kokkinos I, Mohamed S, Vedaldi
A (2014) Describing Textures in the Wild. In: IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 3606–3613
Criminisi A, Perez P, Toyama K (2004) Region filling
and object removal by exemplar-based image inpainting. IEEE Trans Image Process 13(9):1200–1212
Croitoru FA, Hondru V, Ionescu RT, Shah M (2023)
Diffusion models in vision: A survey. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 45(9):10850–10869
Dai Q, Chopp H, Pouyet E, Cossairt O, Walton M, Katsaggelos AK (2020) Adaptive image sampling using
deep learning and its application on x-ray fluorescence image reconstruction. IEEE Trans Multimedia
22(10):2564–2578
Darabi S, Shechtman E, Barnes C, Goldman DB, Sen
P (2012) Image Melding: combining inconsistent images using patch-based synthesis. ACM Trans Graph
(Proc SIGGRAPH) 31(4):1–10
Daubechies I (1990) The wavelet transform, timefrequency localization and signal analysis. IEEE
Trans Inf Theory 36(5):961–1005
Deng J, Dong W, Socher R, Li LJ, Li K, Fei-Fei L (2009)
Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.
In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp
248–255
Deng Y, Tang F, Dong W, Sun W, Huang F,
Xu C (2020) Arbitrary Style Transfer via MultiAdaptation Network. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p 2719–2727
Deng Y, Hui S, Zhou S, Meng D, Wang J (2021)
Learning Contextual Transformer Network for Image Inpainting. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p
2529–2538
Deng Y, Hui S, Meng R, Zhou S, Wang J (2022) Hourglass Attention Network for Image Inpainting. In:
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 483–501
Dinh L, Krueger D, Bengio Y (2014) Nice: Non-linear
independent components estimation. Int Conf Learn
Represent Worksh
Doersch C, Singh S, Gupta A, Sivic J, Efros AA (2012)
What makes paris look like paris? ACM Trans Graph
31(4):101:1–101:9
Dolhansky B, Ferrer CC (2018) Eye In-painting
with Exemplar Generative Adversarial Networks. In:

30

IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 7902–
7911
Dong Q, Cao C, Fu Y (2022) Incremental Transformer
Structure Enhanced Image Inpainting With Masking
Positional Encoding. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pp 11358–11368
Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A, Weissenborn D,
Zhai X, Unterthiner T, Dehghani M, Minderer M,
Heigold G, Gelly S, Uszkoreit J, Houlsby N (2021) An
Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image
Recognition at Scale. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
Dosselmann R, Yang XD (2011) A comprehensive assessment of the structural similarity index. Sign Image and Video Process 5:81–91
Efros A, Leung T (1999) Texture synthesis by nonparametric sampling. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
vol 2, pp 1033–1038
Elharrouss O, Almaadeed N, Al-Maadeed S, Akbari Y
(2020) Image Inpainting: A Review. Neural Process
Letters 51(2):2007–2028
Esser P, Rombach R, Blattmann A, Ommer B (2021)
ImageBART: Bidirectional Context with Multinomial Diffusion for Autoregressive Image Synthesis.
In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol 34, pp
3518–3532
Everingham M, Eslami SMA, Gool LV, Williams CKI,
Winn J, Zisserman A (2015) The pascal visual object
classes challenge: A retrospective. Int J Comput Vis
111:98–136
Felzenszwalb PF, Huttenlocher DP (2004) Efficient
graph-based image segmentation. Int J Comput Vis
(59):167–181
Feng X, Pei W, Li F, Chen F, Zhang D, Lu G
(2022) Generative memory-guided semantic reasoning model for image inpainting. IEEE Trans Circuit
Syst Video Technol 32(11):7432–7447
Fu J, Liu J, Tian H, Li Y, Bao Y, Fang Z, Lu H (2019)
Dual Attention Network for Scene Segmentation. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 3141–
3149
Galić I, Weickert J, Welk M, Bruhn A, Belyaev A, Seidel HP (2008) Image compression with anisotropic
diffusion. J Math Imaging Vis 31:255–269
Gao C, Saraf A, Huang JB, Kopf J (2020) Flow-edge
guided video completion. In: Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 713–729
Gatys LA, Ecker AS, Bethge M (2016) Image Style
Transfer Using Convolutional Neural Networks. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 2414–
2423
Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, WardeFarley D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y (2014) Generative adversarial nets. In: Adv. Neural Inform. Pro-

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

cess. Syst., pp 2672–2680
Granados M, Kim KI, Tompkin J, Kautz J, Theobalt
C (2012) Background Inpainting for Videos with Dynamic Objects and a Free-Moving Camera. In: Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 682–695
Gu J, Shen Y, Zhou B (2020) Image Processing Using Multi-Code GAN Prior. In: IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 3009–3018
Guillemot C, Meur OL (2014) Image inpainting:
Overview and recent advances. IEEE Sign Process
Magazine 31(1):127–144
Guo Q, Gao S, Zhang X, Yin Y, Zhang C (2018)
Patch-based image inpainting via two-stage low
rank approximation. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph
24(6):2023–2036
Guo X, Yang H, Huang D (2021) Image Inpainting via
Conditional Texture and Structure Dual Generation.
In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 14134–14143
Guo Z, Chen Z, Yu T, Chen J, Liu S (2019) Progressive
Image Inpainting with Full-Resolution Residual Network. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p 2496–2504
Han C, Wang J (2021) Face image inpainting with
evolutionary generators. IEEE Sign Process Letters
28:190–193
Han X, Wu Z, Huang W, Scott MR, Davis L (2019)
FiNet: Compatible and Diverse Fashion Image Inpainting. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 4480–4490
He K, Sun J (2012) Statistics of Patch Offsets for Image
Completion. In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 16–29
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual
learning for image recognition. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 770–778
He K, Chen X, Xie S, Li Y, Dollár P, Girshick R (2022)
Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners.
In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp
16000–16009
Herling J, Broll W (2014) High-quality real-time video
inpainting with pixmix. IEEE Trans Vis Comput
Graph 20(6):866–879
Hertz A, Mokady R, Tenenbaum J, Aberman K, Pritch
Y, Cohen-Or D (2022) Prompt-to-prompt image
editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint
arXiv:220801626
Heusel M, Ramsauer H, Unterthiner T, Nessler B,
Hochreiter S (2017) Gans trained by a two time-scale
update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In:
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., pp 6626–6637
Ho J, Jain A, Abbeel P (2020) Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models. In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol 33, pp 6840–6851
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term
memory. Neural Comput 9(8):1735–1780

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

31

Hong X, Xiong P, Ji R, Fan H (2019) Deep Fusion Network for Image Completion. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, pp 2033–2042
Hoogeboom E, Nielsen D, Jaini P, Forré P, Welling
M (2021) Argmax Flows and Multinomial Diffusion:
Learning Categorical Distributions. In: Adv. Neural
Inform. Process. Syst., vol 34, pp 12454–12465
Houle ME (2017a) Local Intrinsic Dimensionality I: An
Extreme-Value-Theoretic Foundation for Similarity
Applications. In: Int. Conf. Similarity Search App.,
pp 64–79
Houle ME (2017b) Local Intrinsic Dimensionality II:
Multivariate Analysis and Distributional Support.
In: Int. Conf. Similarity Search App.
Hu J, Shen L, Sun G (2018) Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pp 7132–7141
Hu YT, Wang H, Ballas N, Grauman K, Schwing AG
(2020) Proposal-based video completion. In: Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 38–54
Huang JB, Kang SB, Ahuja N, Kopf J (2014) Image
completion using planar structure guidance. ACM
Trans Graph (Proc SIGGRAPH) 33(4):1–10
Huang JB, Kang SB, Ahuja N, Kopf J (2016) Temporally coherent completion of dynamic video. ACM
Trans Graph 35(6):1–11
Huang X, Belongie S (2017) Arbitrary Style Transfer
in Real-Time with Adaptive Instance Normalization.
In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 1510–1519
Hui Z, Li J, Wang X, Gao X (2020) Image fine-grained
inpainting. arXiv preprint arXiv:200202609
Iizuka S, Simo-Serra E, Ishikawa H (2017) Globally
and locally consistent image completion. ACM Trans
Graph (Proc SIGGRAPH) 36(4):1–14
Ilan S, Shamir A (2015) A survey on data-driven video
completion. Comput Graph Forum 34(6):60–85
Ilg E, Mayer N, Saikia T, Keuper M, Dosovitskiy
A, Brox T (2017) FlowNet 2.0: Evolution of Optical Flow Estimation with Deep Networks. In: IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 1647–1655
Isola P, Zhu JY, Zhou T, Efros AA (2017) Image-toimage translation with conditional adversarial networks. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pp 1125–1134
Jam J, Kendrick C, Walker K, Drouard V, Hsu JGS,
Yap MH (2021) A comprehensive review of past and
present image inpainting methods. Comput Vis Image Understand 203:103147
Jiang L, Dai B, Wu W, Loy CC (2021) Focal Frequency
Loss for Image Reconstruction and Synthesis. In: Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 13899–13909
Johnson J, Alahi A, Fei-Fei L (2016) Perceptual losses
for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In:

Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 694–711
Kang J, Oh SW, Kim SJ (2022) Error Compensation
Framework for Flow-Guided Video Inpainting. In:
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 375–390
Karras T, Aila T, Laine S, Lehtinen J (2018) Progressive Growing of GANs for Improved Quality, Stability, and Variation. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
Karras T, Laine S, Aila T (2019) A Style-Based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial Networks. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pp 4396–4405
Karras T, Laine S, Aittala M, Hellsten J, Lehtinen J,
Aila T (2020) Analyzing and Improving the Image
Quality of StyleGAN. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog.
Ke L, Tai YW, Tang CK (2021) Occlusion-aware video
object inpainting. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp
14468–14478
Kim D, Woo S, Lee JY, Kweon IS (2019a) Deep
blind video decaptioning by temporal aggregation
and recurrence. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 4263–4272
Kim D, Woo S, Lee JY, Kweon IS (2019b) Deep video
inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 5792–5801
Kim SY, Aberman K, Kanazawa N, Garg R, Wadhwa
N, Chang H, Karnad N, Kim M, Liba O (2022) Zoomto-Inpaint: Image Inpainting With High-Frequency
Details. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.
Worksh., pp 477–487
Kingma DP, Dhariwal P (2018) Glow: Generative Flow
with Invertible 1x1 Convolutions. In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol 31
Kingma DP, Welling M (2014) Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In: Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
Lai WS, Huang JB, Wang O, Shechtman E, Yumer
E, Yang MH (2018) Learning Blind Video Temporal
Consistency. In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 179–
195
Lao D, Zhu P, Wonka P, Sundaramoorthi G (2021)
Flow-Guided Video Inpainting with Scene Templates. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 14599–14608
Ledig C, Theis L, Huszár F, Caballero J, Cunningham
A, Acosta A, Aitken A, Tejani A, Totz J, Wang Z,
Shi W (2017) Photo-Realistic Single Image SuperResolution Using a Generative Adversarial Network.
In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp
105–114
Lee S, Oh SW, Won D, Kim SJ (2019) Copy-and-paste
networks for deep video inpainting. In: Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., pp 4413–4421
Lempitsky V, Vedaldi A, Ulyanov D (2018) Deep Image
Prior. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,

32

pp 9446–9454
Li A, Qi J, Zhang R, Ma X, Ramamohanarao K
(2019a) Generative Image Inpainting with Submanifold Alignment. In: Int. Joint Conf. Artificial Intell.,
pp 811–817
Li A, Zhao S, Ma X, Gong M, Qi J, Zhang R, Tao D,
Kotagiri R (2020a) Short-term and long-term context
aggregation network for video inpainting. In: Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 728–743
Li A, Zhao L, Zuo Z, Wang Z, Xing W, Lu D (2023)
Migt: Multi-modal image inpainting guided with
text. Neurocomputing 520:376–385
Li B, Zheng B, Li H, Li Y (2021) Detail-enhanced image
inpainting based on discrete wavelet transforms. Sign
Process 189:108278
Li CT, Siu WC, Liu ZS, Wang LW, Lun DPK (2020b)
DeepGIN: Deep Generative Inpainting Network for
Extreme Image Inpainting. In: Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Worksh., pp 5–22
Li F, Li A, Qin J, Bai H, Lin W, Cong R, Zhao
Y (2022a) Srinpaintor: When super-resolution meets
transformer for image inpainting. IEEE Trans Computational Imaging 8:743–758
Li H, Li G, Lin L, Yu H, Yu Y (2019b) Contextaware semantic inpainting. IEEE Trans Cybern
49(12):4398–4411
Li J, He F, Zhang L, Du B, Tao D (2019c) Progressive Reconstruction of Visual Structure for Image Inpainting. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 5961–5970
Li J, Wang N, Zhang L, Du B, Tao D (2020c) Recurrent
Feature Reasoning for Image Inpainting. In: IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 7757–7765
Li W, Lin Z, Zhou K, Qi L, Wang Y, Jia J (2022b)
MAT: Mask-Aware Transformer for Large Hole Image Inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog.
Li W, Yu X, Zhou K, Song Y, Lin Z, Jia J (2022c) Sdm:
Spatial diffusion model for large hole image inpainting. arXiv preprint arXiv:221202963
Li Y, Liu S, Yang J, Yang MH (2017) Generative Face
Completion. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 5892–5900
Li Y, Jiang B, Lu Y, Shen L (2019d) Fine-grained Adversarial Image Inpainting with Super Resolution. In:
Int. Joint Conf. Neural Networks, pp 1–8
Li Z, Lu CZ, Qin J, Guo CL, Cheng MM (2022d) Towards an end-to-end framework for flow-guided video
inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 17562–17571
Liao H, Funka-Lea G, Zheng Y, Luo J, Zhou SK
(2018a) Face Completion with Semantic Knowledge
and Collaborative Adversarial Learning. In: Asian
Conf. Comput. Vis., vol 11361, pp 382–397

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

Liao L, Hu R, Xiao J, Wang Z (2018b) Edge-Aware
Context Encoder for Image Inpainting. In: Int. Conf.
Acou. Speech Sign. Process., pp 3156–3160
Liao L, Xiao J, Wang Z, Lin CW, Satoh S (2020) Guidance and Evaluation: Semantic-Aware Image Inpainting for Mixed Scenes. In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Liao L, Xiao J, Wang Z, Lin CW, Satoh S (2021a) Image Inpainting Guided by Coherence Priors of Semantics and Textures. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pp 6539–6548
Liao L, Xiao J, Wang Z, Lin CW, Satoh S (2021b)
Uncertainty-aware semantic guidance and estimation
for image inpainting. IEEE J Selected Topics Sign
Process 15(2):310–323
Lim JH, Ye JC (2017) Geometric gan. arXiv preprint
arXiv:170502894
Lin J, Gan C, Han S (2019) Tsm: Temporal shift module for efficient video understanding. In: Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., pp 7083–7093
Lin Q, Yan B, Li J, Tan W (2020) Mmfl: Multimodal
fusion learning for text-guided image inpainting. In:
ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, pp 1094–1102
Liu G, Reda FA, Shih KJ, Wang TC, Tao A, Catanzaro
B (2018) Image inpainting for irregular holes using
partial convolutions. In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
pp 85–100
Liu H, Jiang B, Xiao Y, Yang C (2019) Coherent semantic attention for image inpainting. In: Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., pp 4170–4179
Liu H, Jiang B, Song Y, Huang W, Yang C (2020)
Rethinking Image Inpainting via a Mutual EncoderDecoder with Feature Equalizations. In: Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis.
Liu H, Wan Z, Huang W, Song Y, Han X, Liao J
(2021a) PD-GAN: Probabilistic Diverse GAN for Image Inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 9367–9376
Liu R, Deng H, Huang Y, Shi X, Lu L, Sun W, Wang X,
Dai J, Li H (2021b) FuseFormer: Fusing Fine-Grained
Information in Transformers for Video Inpainting. In:
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 14040–14049
Liu T, Liao L, Wang Z, Satoh S (2022) ReferenceGuided Texture and Structure Inference for Image
Inpainting. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., pp
1996–2000
Liu W, Cao C, Liu J, Ren C, Wei Y, Guo H (2021c)
Fine-grained image inpainting with scale-enhanced
generative adversarial network. Pattern Recog Letters
143:81–87
Liu Z, Luo P, Wang X, Tang X (2015) Deep learning
face attributes in the wild. In: Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 3730–3738

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

33

Liu Z, Lin Y, Cao Y, Hu H, Wei Y, Zhang Z, Lin S,
Guo B (2021d) Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted Windows. In: Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 9992–10002
Lu Z, Jiang J, Huang J, Wu G, Liu X (2022) GLaMa:
Joint Spatial and Frequency Loss for General Image Inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog. Worksh., pp 1301–1310
Lugmayr A, Danelljan M, Van Gool L, Timofte R
(2020) SRFlow: Learning the Super-Resolution Space
with Normalizing Flow. In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
p 715–732
Lugmayr A, Danelljan M, Romero A, Yu F, Timofte R,
Van Gool L (2022) RePaint: Inpainting using Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. In: IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 11451–11461
Ma Y, Liu X, Bai S, Wang L, He D, Liu A (2019)
Coarse-to-Fine Image Inpainting via Region-wise
Convolutions and Non-Local Correlation. In: Int.
Joint Conf. Artificial Intell., pp 3123–3129
Mallat SG (1989) A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: the wavelet representation. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 11(7):674–693
Mao X, Li Q, Xie H, Lau RY, Wang Z, Paul Smolley
S (2017) Least Squares Generative Adversarial Networks. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Masnou S, Morel JM (1998) Level lines based disocclusion. In: IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., vol 3, pp
259–263
Navasardyan S, Ohanyan M (2020) Image Inpainting
with Onion Convolutions. In: Asian Conf. Comput.
Vis.
Nazeri K, Ng E, Joseph T, Qureshi F, Ebrahimi M
(2019) EdgeConnect: Structure Guided Image Inpainting using Edge Prediction. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Worksh.
Newson A, Almansa A, Fradet M, Gousseau Y, Pérez
P (2014) Video inpainting of complex scenes. SIAM
J Imaging Sciences 7(4):1993–2019
Ni M, Li X, Zuo W (2023) NÜWA-LIP: Languageguided Image Inpainting with Defect-free VQGAN.
In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp
14183–14192
Oh SW, Lee S, Lee JY, Kim SJ (2019) Onion-peel networks for deep video completion. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 4403–4412
Ojala T, Pietikäinen M, Harwood D (1996) A comparative study of texture measures with classification based on featured distributions. Pattern Recog
29(1):51–59
Ojala T, Pietikainen M, Maenpaa T (2002) Multiresolution gray-scale and rotation invariant texture classification with local binary patterns. IEEE Trans Pat-

tern Anal Mach Intell 24(7):971–987
Ouyang H, Wang T, Chen Q (2021) Internal video inpainting by implicit long-range propagation. In: Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 14579–14588
Park T, Liu MY, Wang TC, Zhu JY (2019) Semantic
Image Synthesis With Spatially-Adaptive Normalization. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pp 2332–2341
Parmar G, Singh KK, Zhang R, Li Y, Lu J, Zhu JY
(2023) Zero-shot image-to-image translation. arXiv
preprint arxiv230203027
Pathak D, Krahenbuhl P, Donahue J, Darrell T, Efros
AA (2016) Context encoders: Feature learning by
inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 2536–2544
Peng J, Liu D, Xu S, Li H (2021) Generating Diverse Structure for Image Inpainting With Hierarchical VQ-VAE. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 10770–10779
Perazzi F, Pont-Tuset J, McWilliams B, Van Gool L,
Gross M, Sorkine-Hornung A (2016) A Benchmark
Dataset and Evaluation Methodology for Video Object Segmentation. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pp 724–732
Phutke SS, Murala S (2021) Diverse receptive field
based adversarial concurrent encoder network for image inpainting. IEEE Sign Process Letters 28:1873–
1877
Qin J, Bai H, Zhao Y (2021) Multi-scale attention network for image inpainting. Comput Vis Image Understand 204:103155
Qiu J, Gao Y, Shen M (2021) Semantic-sca: Semantic
structure image inpainting with the spatial-channel
attention. IEEE Access 9:12997–13008
Quan W, Zhang R, Zhang Y, Li Z, Wang J, Yan DM
(2022) Image inpainting with local and global refinement. IEEE Trans Image Process 31:2405–2420
Radford A, Metz L, Chintala S (2016) Unsupervised
Representation Learning with Deep Convolutional
Generative Adversarial Networks. In: Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent.
Ren J, Zheng Q, Zhao Y, Xu X, Li C (2022) DLFormer:
Discrete Latent Transformer for Video Inpainting. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 3511–
3520
Ren JS, Xu L, Yan Q, Sun W (2015) Shepard Convolutional Neural Networks. In: Adv. Neural Inform.
Process. Syst., vol 28, p 901–909
Ren Y, Yu X, Zhang R, Li TH, Liu S, Li G (2019)
StructureFlow: Image Inpainting via Structure-aware
Appearance Flow. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp
181–190

34

Rezende DJ, Mohamed S (2015) Variational Inference
with Normalizing Flows. In: Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
p 1530–1538
Richardson E, Alaluf Y, Patashnik O, Nitzan Y, Azar
Y, Shapiro S, Cohen-Or D (2021) Encoding in Style:
a StyleGAN Encoder for Image-to-Image Translation. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pp 2287–2296
Rombach R, Blattmann A, Lorenz D, Esser P, Ommer
B (2022) High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pp 10674–10685
Rössler A, Cozzolino D, Verdoliva L, Riess C, Thies J,
Nießner M (2018) Faceforensics: A large-scale video
dataset for forgery detection in human faces. arXiv
preprint arXiv:180309179
Roy H, Chaudhury S, Yamasaki T, Hashimoto T (2021)
Image inpainting using frequency-domain priors. J
Electronic Imaging 30(2):023016
Ruder M, Dosovitskiy A, Brox T (2016) Artistic
Style Transfer for Videos. In: German Conf. Pattern
Recog., pp 26–36
Rudin LI, Osher S, Fatemi E (1992) Nonlinear total
variation based noise removal algorithms. Physica D:
Nonlinear Phenomena 60(1):259–268
Sagong Mc, Shin Yg, Kim Sw, Park S, Ko Sj (2019)
PEPSI : Fast Image Inpainting With Parallel Decoding Network. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 11352–11360
Saharia C, Chan W, Chang H, Lee C, Ho J, Salimans T,
Fleet D, Norouzi M (2022a) Palette: Image-to-Image
Diffusion Models. In: ACM SIGGRAPH Conf.
Saharia C, Chan W, Saxena S, Li L, Whang J, Denton E, Ghasemipour SKS, Gontijo-Lopes R, Ayan
BK, Salimans T, Ho J, Fleet DJ, Norouzi M (2022b)
Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models with
Deep Language Understanding. In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst.
Schrader K, Peter P, Kämper N, Weickert J (2023) Efficient Neural Generation of 4K Masks for Homogeneous Diffusion Inpainting. In: Int. Conf. Scale Space
Variational Methods Comput. Vis., pp 16–28
Schuhmann C, Beaumont R, Vencu R, Gordon CW,
Wightman R, Cherti M, Coombes T, Katta A, Mullis
C, Wortsman M, Schramowski P, Kundurthy SR,
Crowson K, Schmidt L, Kaczmarczyk R, Jitsev J
(2022) LAION-5B: An open large-scale dataset for
training next generation image-text models. In: Adv.
Neural Inform. Process. Syst.
Shao H, Wang Y, Fu Y, Yin Z (2020) Generative image
inpainting via edge structure and color aware fusion.
Sign Process: Image Communication 87:115929

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

Shen L, Hong R, Zhang H, Zhang H, Wang M (2019)
Single-Shot Semantic Image Inpainting with Densely
Connected Generative Networks. In: ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, p 1861–1869
Shin YG, Sagong MC, Yeo YJ, Kim SW, Ko SJ (2021)
Pepsi++: Fast and lightweight network for image inpainting. IEEE Trans Neural Networks Learn Syst
32(1):252–265
Shukla T, Maheshwari P, Singh R, Shukla A, Kulkarni K, Turaga P (2023) Scene Graph Driven TextPrompt Generation for Image Inpainting. In: IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. Worksh., pp 759–
768
Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2014) Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:14091556
Sohl-Dickstein J, Weiss E, Maheswaranathan N, Ganguli S (2015) Deep Unsupervised Learning using
Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics. In: Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., vol 37, pp 2256–2265
Song L, Cao J, Song L, Hu Y, He R (2019) GeometryAware Face Completion and Editing. In: AAAI Conf.
Artificial Intell., pp 2506–2513
Song Y, Yang C, Lin Z, Liu X, Huang Q, Li H, Kuo
CCJ (2018a) Contextual-Based Image Inpainting: Infer, Match, and Translate. In: Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 3–18
Song Y, Yang C, Shen Y, Wang P, Huang Q, Kuo
CCJ (2018b) SPG-Net: Segmentation Prediction and
Guidance Network for Image Inpainting. In: Brit.
Mach. Vis. Conf.
Sun D, Yang X, Liu MY, Kautz J (2018a) PWC-Net:
CNNs for Optical Flow Using Pyramid, Warping, and
Cost Volume. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 8934–8943
Sun K, Xiao B, Liu D, Wang J (2019) Deep HighResolution Representation Learning for Human Pose
Estimation. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 5686–5696
Sun Q, Ma L, Joon Oh S, Gool LV, Schiele B, Fritz M
(2018b) Natural and Effective Obfuscation by Head
Inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 5050–5059
Suvorov R, Logacheva E, Mashikhin A, Remizova A,
Ashukha A, Silvestrov A, Kong N, Goka H, Park K,
Lempitsky V (2022) Resolution-robust Large Mask
Inpainting with Fourier Convolutions. In: Winter
Conf. App. Comput. Vis., pp 3172–3182
Tabak EG, Vanden-Eijnden E (2010) Density estimation by dual ascent of the log-likelihood. Commun
Math Sci 8(1):217 – 233
Tschumperlé D, Deriche R (2005) Vector-valued image regularization with pdes: a common framework

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

35

for different applications. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 27(4):506–517
Tu CT, Chen YF (2019) Facial Image Inpainting
with Variational Autoencoder. In: Inter. Conf. Intell. Robot. Control Engin., pp 119–122
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L,
Gomez AN, Kaiser u, Polosukhin I (2017) Attention
is All You Need. In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., p 6000–6010
Vo HV, Duong NQK, Pérez P (2018) Structural
Inpainting. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p
1948–1956
Wadhwa G, Dhall A, Murala S, Tariq U (2021) Hyperrealistic Image Inpainting with Hypergraphs. In:
Winter Conf. App. Comput. Vis., pp 3911–3920
Wan Z, Zhang B, Chen D, Zhang P, Chen D, Liao J,
Wen F (2020) Bringing Old Photos Back to Life. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 2747–
2757
Wan Z, Zhang J, Chen D, Liao J (2021) High-Fidelity
Pluralistic Image Completion With Transformers. In:
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 4692–4701
Wang C, Huang H, Han X, Wang J (2019a) Video Inpainting by Jointly Learning Temporal Structure and
Spatial Details. In: AAAI Conf. Artificial Intell., pp
5232–5239
Wang C, Zhu Y, Yuan C (2022a) Diverse Image Inpainting with Normalizing Flow. In: Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 53–69
Wang J, Wang C, Huang Q, Shi Y, Cai JF, Zhu Q,
Yin B (2020a) Image Inpainting Based on MultiFrequency Probabilistic Inference Model. In: ACM
Int. Conf. Multimedia, p 1–9
Wang N, Li J, Zhang L, Du B (2019b) MUSICAL:
Multi-Scale Image Contextual Attention Learning for
Inpainting. In: Int. Joint Conf. Artificial Intell., pp
3748–3754
Wang N, Ma S, Li J, Zhang Y, Zhang L (2020b) Multistage attention network for image inpainting. Pattern
Recog 106:107448
Wang N, Zhang Y, Zhang L (2021a) Dynamic selection network for image inpainting. IEEE Trans Image
Process 30:1784–1798
Wang S, Saharia C, Montgomery C, Pont-Tuset J, Noy
S, Pellegrini S, Onoe Y, Laszlo S, Fleet DJ, Soricut R,
et al. (2023) Imagen editor and editbench: Advancing and evaluating text-guided image inpainting. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 18359–
18369
Wang T, Ouyang H, Chen Q (2021b) Image Inpainting
with External-internal Learning and Monochromic
Bottleneck. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 5116–5125

Wang TC, Liu MY, Zhu JY, Liu G, Tao A, Kautz J,
Catanzaro B (2018a) Video-to-Video Synthesis. In:
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol 31
Wang W, Zhang J, Niu L, Ling H, Yang X, Zhang L
(2021c) Parallel Multi-Resolution Fusion Network for
Image Inpainting. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp
14559–14568
Wang W, Niu L, Zhang J, Yang X, Zhang L (2022b)
Dual-path Image Inpainting with Auxiliary GAN
Inversion. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 11411–11420
Wang X, Girshick RB, Gupta A, He K (2018b) Nonlocal Neural Networks. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pp 7794–7803
Wang Y, Tao X, Qi X, Shen X, Jia J (2018c) Image Inpainting via Generative Multi-column Convolutional
Neural Networks. In: Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., pp 331–340
Wang Y, Chen YC, Tao X, Jia J (2020c) VCNet: A
Robust Approach to Blind Image Inpainting. In: Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis.
Wang Z, Simoncelli E, Bovik A (2003) Multiscale structural similarity for image quality assessment. In:
Asilomar Conf. Sign. Syst. Comput., vol 2, pp 1398–
1402
Wang Z, Bovik AC, Sheikh HR, Simoncelli EP (2004)
Image quality assessment: from error visibility to
structural similarity. IEEE Trans Image Process
13(4):600–612
Weng Y, Ding S, Zhou T (2022) A Survey on Improved
GAN based Image Inpainting. In: Inter. Conf. Consumer Electronics and Comput. Engin., pp 319–322
Wexler Y, Shechtman E, Irani M (2007) Space-time
completion of video. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach
Intell 29(3):463–476
Woo S, Kim D, Park K, Lee JY, Kweon IS (2020) Alignand-Attend Network for Globally and Locally Coherent Video Inpainting. In: Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., pp
1–13
Wu H, Zhou J, Li Y (2022) Deep generative model
for image inpainting with local binary pattern learning and spatial attention. IEEE Trans Multimedia
24:4016–4027
Wu L, Zhang C, Liu J, Han J, Liu J, Ding E, Bai X
(2019) Editing Text in the Wild. In: ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, p 1500–1508
Wu X, Xie Y, Zeng J, Yang Z, Yu Y, Li Q, Liu W
(2021) Adversarial learning with mask reconstruction
for text-guided image inpainting. In: ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, pp 3464–3472
Xia W, Zhang Y, Yang Y, Xue JH, Zhou B, Yang MH
(2022) Gan inversion: A survey. IEEE Trans Pattern
Anal Mach Intell pp 1–17

36

Xie C, Liu S, Li C, Cheng MM, Zuo W, Liu X, Wen
S, Ding E (2019) Image Inpainting with Learnable
Bidirectional Attention Maps. In: Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 8858–8867
Xie M, Li C, Liu X, Wong TT (2020) Manga filling style
conversion with screentone variational autoencoder.
ACM Trans Graph 39(6)
Xie M, Xia M, Liu X, Li C, Wong TT (2021) Seamless
manga inpainting with semantics awareness. ACM
Trans Graph 40(4)
Xie S, Zhang Z, Lin Z, Hinz T, Zhang K (2023) SmartBrush: Text and Shape Guided Object Inpainting
With Diffusion Model. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pp 22428–22437
Xie Y, Lin Z, Yang Z, Deng H, Wu X, Mao X, Li Q, Liu
W (2022) Learning semantic alignment from image
for text-guided image inpainting. The Visual Computer 38(9-10):3149–3161
Xiong W, Yu J, Lin Z, Yang J, Lu X, Barnes C, Luo
J (2019) Foreground-Aware Image Inpainting. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 5833–
5841
Xu N, Yang L, Fan Y, Yang J, Yue D, Liang Y, Price B,
Cohen S, Huang T (2018a) YouTube-VOS: Sequenceto-Sequence Video Object Segmentation. In: Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 585–601
Xu R, Li X, Zhou B, Loy CC (2019) Deep flow-guided
video inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 3723–3732
Xu R, Guo M, Wang J, Li X, Zhou B, Loy CC (2021)
Texture memory-augmented deep patch-based image
inpainting. IEEE Trans Image Process 30:9112–9124
Xu T, Zhang P, Huang Q, Zhang H, Gan Z, Huang
X, He X (2018b) Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial networks. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 1316–1324
Yamashita Y, Shimosato K, Ukita N (2022) BoundaryAware Image Inpainting With Multiple Auxiliary
Cues. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.
Worksh., pp 619–629
Yan Z, Li X, Li M, Zuo W, Shan S (2018) Shift-Net:
Image Inpainting via Deep Feature Rearrangement.
In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 3–19
Yang C, Lu X, Lin Z, Shechtman E, Wang O, Li H
(2017) High-resolution image inpainting using multiscale neural patch synthesis. In: IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 6721–6729
Yang J, Qi Z, Shi Y (2020) Learning to Incorporate
Structure Knowledge for Image Inpainting. In: AAAI
Conf. Artificial Intell., vol 34, pp 12605–12612
Yang L, Zhang Z, Song Y, Hong S, Xu R, Zhao Y,
Zhang W, Cui B, Yang MH (2023) Diffusion models:

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

A comprehensive survey of methods and applications.
2209.00796
Yeh RA, Chen C, Lim TY, Schwing AG, HasegawaJohnson M, Do MN (2017) Semantic Image Inpainting with Deep Generative Models. In: IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 6882–6890
Yi Z, Tang Q, Azizi S, Jang D, Xu Z (2020) Contextual
Residual Aggregation for Ultra High-Resolution Image Inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 7508–7517
Yu F, Koltun V (2016) Multi-Scale Context Aggregation by Dilated Convolutions. In: Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent.
Yu J, Lin Z, Yang J, Shen X, Lu X, Huang TS (2018)
Generative image inpainting with contextual attention. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pp 5505–5514
Yu J, Lin Z, Yang J, Shen X, Lu X, Huang TS (2019)
Free-form image inpainting with gated convolution.
In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 4471–4480
Yu T, Guo Z, Jin X, Wu S, Chen Z, Li W, Zhang Z, Liu
S (2020) Region Normalization for Image Inpainting.
In: AAAI Conf. Artificial Intell., pp 12733–12740
Yu Y, Zhan F, Lu S, Pan J, Ma F, Xie X, Miao C
(2021a) WaveFill: A Wavelet-Based Generation Network for Image Inpainting. In: Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 14114–14123
Yu Y, Zhan F, WU R, Pan J, Cui K, Lu S, Ma F, Xie X,
Miao C (2021b) Diverse Image Inpainting with Bidirectional and Autoregressive Transformers. In: ACM
Int. Conf. Multimedia, p 69–78
Yu Y, Du D, Zhang L, Luo T (2022a) Unbiased Multimodality Guidance for Image Inpainting. In: Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 668–684
Yu Y, Zhang L, Fan H, Luo T (2022b) High-Fidelity
Image Inpainting with GAN Inversion. In: Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., pp 242–258
Zeng Y, Fu J, Chao H, Guo B (2019) Learning pyramidcontext encoder network for high-quality image inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 1486–1494
Zeng Y, Fu J, Chao H (2020a) Learning Joint SpatialTemporal Transformations for Video Inpainting. In:
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Springer, pp 528–543
Zeng Y, Lin Z, Yang J, Zhang J, Shechtman E, Lu H
(2020b) High-Resolution Image Inpainting with Iterative Confidence Feedback and Guided Upsampling.
In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Zeng Y, Gong Y, Zhang J (2021a) Feature learning and
patch matching for diverse image inpainting. Pattern
Recog 119:108036
Zeng Y, Lin Z, Lu H, Patel VM (2021b) CR-Fill:
Generative Image Inpainting With Auxiliary Contex-

Deep Learning-based Image and Video Inpainting: A Survey

37

tual Reconstruction. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp
14164–14173
Zeng Y, Fu J, Chao H, Guo B (2022) Aggregated contextual transformations for high-resolution image inpainting. IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph pp 1–1
Zhang B, Gao Y, Zhao S, Liu J (2010) Local derivative
pattern versus local binary pattern: Face recognition
with high-order local pattern descriptor. IEEE Trans
Image Process 19(2):533–544
Zhang H, Hu Z, Luo C, Zuo W, Wang M (2018a) Semantic Image Inpainting with Progressive Generative Networks. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p
1939–1947
Zhang H, Mai L, Xu N, Wang Z, Collomosse J, Jin H
(2019a) An internal learning approach to video inpainting. In: Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp 2720–2729
Zhang J, Niu L, Yang D, Kang L, Li Y, Zhao W, Zhang
L (2019b) GAIN: Gradient Augmented Inpainting
Network for Irregular Holes. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p 1870–1878
Zhang K, Fu J, Liu D (2022a) Flow-Guided Transformer for Video Inpainting. In: Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 74–90
Zhang K, Fu J, Liu D (2022b) Inertia-Guided Flow
Completion and Style Fusion for Video Inpainting.
In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp
5982–5991
Zhang L, Agrawala M (2023) Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. 2302.05543
Zhang L, Chen Q, Hu B, Jiang S (2020a) Text-Guided
Neural Image Inpainting. In: ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p 1302–1310
Zhang L, Barnes C, Wampler K, Amirghodsi S, Shechtman E, Lin Z, Shi J (2022c) Inpainting at Modern Camera Resolution by Guided PatchMatch
with Auto-curation. In: Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp
51–67
Zhang L, Zhou Y, Barnes C, Amirghodsi S, Lin Z,
Shechtman E, Shi J (2022d) Perceptual Artifacts
Localization for Inpainting. In: Computer Vision –
ECCV 2022, pp 146–164
Zhang R, Isola P, Efros AA, Shechtman E, Wang O
(2018b) The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 586–595
Zhang R, Quan W, Wu B, Li Z, Yan DM (2020b) Pixelwise dense detector for image inpainting. Comput
Graph Forum 39(7)
Zhang R, Quan W, Zhang Y, Wang J, Yan DM (2022e)
W-net: Structure and texture interaction for image
inpainting. IEEE Trans Multimedia pp 1–12
Zhang S, He R, Sun Z, Tan T (2018c) Demeshnet: Blind
face inpainting for deep meshface verification. IEEE

Trans Inf Forensics Secur 13(3):637–647
Zhang W, Zhu J, Tai Y, Wang Y, Chu W, Ni B, Wang
C, Yang X (2021) Context-Aware Image Inpainting
with Learned Semantic Priors. In: Int. Joint Conf.
Artificial Intell., pp 1323–1329
Zhang Z, Zhao Z, Zhang Z, Huai B, Yuan J (2020c)
Text-guided image inpainting. In: ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, pp 4079–4087
Zhao L, Mo Q, Lin S, Wang Z, Zuo Z, Chen H, Xing
W, Lu D (2020) UCTGAN: Diverse Image Inpainting
Based on Unsupervised Cross-Space Translation. In:
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pp 5740–
5749
Zhao S, Cui J, Sheng Y, Dong Y, Liang X, Chang EI,
Xu Y (2021) Large Scale Image Completion via CoModulated Generative Adversarial Networks. In: Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent.
Zhao W, Rao Y, Liu Z, Liu B, Zhou J, Lu J (2023)
Unleashing text-to-image diffusion models for visual
perception. arXiv preprint arXiv:230302153
Zheng C, Cham TJ, Cai J (2019) Pluralistic Image
Completion. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 1438–1447
Zheng C, Cham TJ, Cai J (2021a) Pluralistic free-form
image completion. Int J Comput Vis 129:2786–2805
Zheng C, Cham TJ, Cai J, Phung D (2022a) Bridging
Global Context Interactions for High-Fidelity Image
Completion. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., pp 11512–11522
Zheng H, Zhang Z, Wang Y, Zhang Z, Xu M, Yang
Y, Wang M (2021b) GCM-Net: Towards Effective
Global Context Modeling for Image Inpainting. In:
ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, p 2586–2594
Zheng H, Lin Z, Lu J, Cohen S, Shechtman E, Barnes
C, Zhang J, Xu N, Amirghodsi S, Luo J (2022b)
Image Inpainting with Cascaded Modulation GAN
and Object-Aware Training. In: Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., pp 277–296
Zhou B, Lapedriza A, Khosla A, Oliva A, Torralba A
(2017) Places: A 10 million image database for scene
recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell
40(6):1452–1464
Zhou B, Zhao H, Puig X, Xiao T, Fidler S, Barriuso
A, Torralba A (2018) Semantic understanding of
scenes through the ade20k dataset. Int J Comput Vis
127:302–321
Zhou X, Li J, Wang Z, He R, Tan T (2021) Image Inpainting with Contrastive Relation Network. In: Int.
Conf. Pattern Recog., pp 4420–4427
Zhu M, He D, Li X, Li C, Li F, Liu X, Ding E, Zhang
Z (2021) Image inpainting by end-to-end cascaded
refinement with mask awareness. IEEE Trans Image
Process 30:4855–4866

38

Zou X, Yang L, Liu D, Lee YJ (2021) Progressive temporal feature alignment network for video inpainting. In: IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pp 16448–16457

Weize Quan 1,2 et al.

