IEEE TPAMI

1

Diffusion Models in Low-Level Vision: A Survey

arXiv:2406.11138v2 [cs.CV] 25 Feb 2025

Chunming He, Yuqi Shen, Chengyu Fang, Fengyang Xiao, Longxiang Tang,
Yulun Zhang, Wangmeng Zuo, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhenhua Guo, Xiu Li
Abstract—Deep generative models have gained considerable attention in low-level vision tasks due to their powerful generative
capabilities. Among these, diffusion model-based approaches, which employ a forward diffusion process to degrade an image and a
reverse denoising process for image generation, have become particularly prominent for producing high-quality, diverse samples with
intricate texture details. Despite their widespread success in low-level vision, there remains a lack of a comprehensive, insightful survey
that synthesizes and organizes the advances in diffusion model-based techniques. To address this gap, this paper presents the first
comprehensive review focused on denoising diffusion models applied to low-level vision tasks, covering both theoretical and practical
contributions. We outline three general diffusion modeling frameworks and explore their connections with other popular deep
generative models, establishing a solid theoretical foundation for subsequent analysis. We then categorize diffusion models used in
low-level vision tasks from multiple perspectives, considering both the underlying framework and the target application. Beyond natural
image processing, we also summarize diffusion models applied to other low-level vision domains, including medical imaging, remote
sensing, and video processing. Additionally, we provide an overview of widely used benchmarks and evaluation metrics in low-level
vision tasks. Our review includes an extensive evaluation of diffusion model-based techniques across six representative tasks, with
both quantitative and qualitative analysis. Finally, we highlight the limitations of current diffusion models and propose four promising
directions for future research. This comprehensive review aims to foster a deeper understanding of the role of denoising diffusion
models in low-level vision. For those interested, a curated list of diffusion model-based techniques, datasets, and related information
across over 20 low-level vision tasks is available at https://github.com/ChunmingHe/awesome-diffusion-models-in-low-level-vision.
Index Terms—Diffusion Models, Score-based Stochastic Differential Equations, Low-level Vision Tasks, Medical Image Processing,
Remote Sensing Data Processing, Video Processing.

✦

1

I NTRODUCTION

L

OW- LEVEL vision tasks, a fundamental aspect of computer vision, have been extensively studied for improving low-quality data degraded by complex scenarios. These
tasks encompass a wide range of practical applications,
including but not limited to image super-resolution [1],
deblurring [2], dehazing [3], inpainting [4], fusion [5], compressed sensing [6], low-light enhancement [7], and cloud
removal in remote sensing [8]. See Fig. 1 for visual results.
Traditional approaches [14], [15] framed low-level vision
problems as variational optimization challenges and utilized
handcrafted algorithms to enforce proximity constraints related to specific image properties or degradation priors [16]–
[19]. However, these methods often struggle to handle complex degradations due to their limited generalizability. With
the rise of deep learning, convolutional neural networks

This work was supported by the STI 2030-Major Projects under Grant
2021ZD0201404.
Corresponding author: Xiu Li (e-mail: li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Chunming He, Yuqi Shen, and Chenyu Fang contributed equally.
Chunming He, Yuqi Shen, Chengyu Fang, Longxiang Tang, and Xiu Li
are with Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:chunminghe19990224@gmail.com;
ericsyq buaa@163.com; chengyufang.thu@gmail.com; lloong.x@gmail.com).
Chunming He and Fengyang Xiao are with the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708 USA (e-mail: chunming.he@duke.edu; xiaofy5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn).
Yulun Zhang is with MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China (e-mail: yulun100@gmail.com).
Wangmeng Zuo is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150006, China (e-mail:
wmzuo@hit.edu.cn).
Zhenhua Guo is with Tianyijiaotong Technology Ltd., Suzhou 215131, China
(e-mail: cszguo@gmail.com).

(CNNs) [20] and transformers [21] have become widely
adopted in low-level vision tasks for their powerful feature
extraction capabilities. Additionally, the availability of largescale datasets, such as DIV2K [22] for super-resolution and
Rain800 [23] for deraining, has further enhanced their generalizability. While these methods have achieved promising
results, particularly in distortion-based metrics like PSNR
and SSIM, they still suffer from poor texture generation,
limiting their applicability in complex real-world scenarios.
To address this limitation, deep generative models, particularly generative adversarial networks (GANs) [24], have
been introduced into low-level vision tasks. Leveraging
their strong generative abilities, these models aim to synthesize realistic texture details, extending their applicability to real-world scenarios. However, GAN-based methods
face critical challenges: (1) the training process is prone to
mode collapse and unstable optimization, requiring intricate
hyperparameter tuning, and (2) the generated results often
exhibit artifacts and counterfactual details, thereby undermining global coherence and limiting practical use.
Recently, diffusion models (DMs) [25]–[33] have
emerged as a promising alternative in computer vision
due to their impressive generative capabilities and training
stability. DMs operate through a forward diffusion process,
which introduces noise to the data, and a reverse diffusion
process that learns to remove the noise, thus generating
high-quality samples. Unlike GANs, DMs fall under the category of likelihood-based models and frame their training
objective as a re-weighted variational lower bound. This
offers benefits such as extensive distribution coverage, a
stable training objective, and straightforward scalability.

IEEE TPAMI

2

(a) Image Super-resolution

(b) Image Deblurring

(c) Image Inpainting

(d) Low-light Image Enhancement

(e) Limited-angle CT Reconstruction

(f) Cloud Removal

Fig. 1: Examples of various low-level vision tasks with the low-quality image (left) and the enhanced high-quality image
(right). Notice that all the enhanced results are generated with diffusion model-based algorithms, which are IDM [9] in (a),
MSGD [10] in (b), Repaint [11] in (c), Reti-Diff [12] in (d), DOLCE [13] in (e), and DDPM-CR [8] in (f).

Interpolation

Super-resolution

Fusion
6.48%

7.14%

1.95%

10.34%

MRI

22.73%

1.3%

Dehaze

25.68%

2.6%

Deblur

5.19%

5.84%

0.65%
0.65%

32.21%

4.05%

1.35%

3.25%

20.69%

HSI

SAR

10.17%
0.65% 2.6%

Prediction
10.34%

PET

1.3%

3.39%

15.25%

8.11%

CT

0.65%

LLIE

Inpaint

24.03%

12.99%

51.35%

OCT

Ultrasound

5.41%

Visible-light
38.98%

Super-resolution

Restoration

34.48%

24.15%

4.05%

(a) Natural Image

(b) Medical

(c) Remote Sensing

(d) Video

Fig. 2: Distributions of the four main low-level vision scenarios of DM-based models. In each Venn diagram, the overlapping
regions between circles indicate that these models can address multiple application tasks or input modalities.
Building on these advantages, DMs have shown remarkable success across various domains, including data
generation, image content comprehension, and low-level
vision. In the realm of low-level vision, DMs [9], [10],
[34], [35] primarily focus on restoring degraded data, thus
enabling the reconstruction of high-quality images with
detailed semantics and realistic textures, even in scenarios characterized by severe and complex degradations. As
depicted in Fig. 1, numerous DM-based algorithms have
delivered promising results across diverse low-level vision
tasks. However, the diversity and complexity of techniques
used in different tasks pose significant challenges for understanding, improving, and developing a general-purpose
reconstruction model. Therefore, there is a critical need for
a well-organized and comprehensive survey on DM-based
low-level vision tasks. Existing DM-based surveys [36]–
[39] generally focus on foundational theoretical models or
generation-based techniques, while only a few reviews [40]–
[42] address specific problems or a limited range of tasks in
natural image scenarios within low-level vision.
To address this gap and overcome the aforementioned
limitations, we propose the first comprehensive DM-based
survey tailored to low-level vision tasks (see Figs. 2 and 3).
This survey provides a detailed theoretical introduction,
explores wide-ranging applications, offers thorough experi-

mental analyses, and presents extensive future perspectives.
Specifically, we begin with a comprehensive overview of
diffusion models in Sec. 2, clarifying their connections to
other deep generative models. We then summarize cuttingedge DM-based methods in natural low-level vision tasks
in Sec. 3, categorizing them based on both their underlying
frameworks and target tasks, covering six widely used tasks.
In Sec. 4, we expand the scope to include medical imaging,
remote sensing, and video scenarios, providing a broad
overview of DM applications. Furthermore, Sec. 5 reviews
widely used benchmarks and fundamental evaluation metrics in low-level vision tasks, and presents a comprehensive
experimental evaluation of DM-based techniques across six
representative tasks, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Finally, in Sec. 6, we identify key limitations of current DMbased methods and propose four major directions for future
research, followed by a concluding summary in Sec. 7.
Note. We explored multiple databases, including DBLP,
Google Scholar, and ArXiv, and focused on reputable
sources such as TPAMI, IJCV, and CVPR. Preference was
given to studies with available code and higher citations,
reflecting broader academic recognition. We further applied
a rigorous evaluation process to each paper, assessing its
contribution and determining whether it was a seminal
work. Hence, our survey can present a comprehensive

IEEE TPAMI

3
SUPIR
DiMO

100

Video Scenario
Remote Sensing
Medical Data
Natural Image

90

Number of articles

80

DiffUIR

PLRDiff

DiffMSR

VD-Diff

Reti-Diff

HIR-Diff

Syndiff

DiffTTA

EDiffSR
IR-SDE

70

MGLD

StableSR

60

IDM

50

DDRF
DDNM

40
30
20
10

SR3

ILVR

SRDiff

DVSR

CDM

Score-MRI

SNIPS

CSGM

2021.01-06

2021.07-12

DDRM

DPS

Palette

DOLCE

DenoOCT

PSSR

MCVD

0
2022.01-06

2022.07-12

2023.01-06

2023.07-12

2024.07-Present Time

2024.01-06

Fig. 3: The bar chart illustrates the continuous growth of DM-based methods in low-level vision tasks across four distinct
scenarios. Representative works are categorized and marked on the line graph with colors corresponding to each scenario
as indicated in the legend. The methods highlighted represent the seminal works of each period, e.g., StableSR [43] has
garnered 1.9k GitHub stars, SR3 [44] boasts 1.2k citations, and SUPIR [45] is a pioneering DM-based multi-modal solution.
Data

Forward diffusion process by adding noise

Noise

and xt ∈ Rd , t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }, sharing the same dimension
d as x0 . Hence, the forward process can be expressed as the
posterior q(x1 , . . . , xT |x0 ) basedYon the Markov chains:
(1)
q(x1 , · · · , xT |x0 ) := Tt=1 q(xt |xt−1 ),
p
q(xt |xt−1 ) := N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I),
(2)
given the hyperparameters αt := 1 − βt , ᾱt := ts=1 αs .
The above equations can be reformulated as
√
q(xt |x0 ) = N (xt ; ᾱt x0 , (1 − ᾱt )I).
(3)
By reparameterizing Eq. (3), xt can be calculated as
√
√
xt (x0 , ϵ) = ᾱt x0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0, I).
(4)
R
While the latter process pθ (x0 ) = pθ (x0:T )dx1:T reverses the former from p(xT ) = N (xT ; 0, I).
X
pθ (xt−1 |xt ) = N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), θ (xt , t)),
(5)
where learnable Gaussian transitions kernels with θ are
parameterized by deep neural networks under the training
objects of minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between q(x0 , x1 , · · ·, xT ) and pθ (x0 , x1 , · · ·, xT ).
The optimization principle is as follows: To generate x0
in the reverse process, we sample from the noise vector
xT ∼ p(xT ) to obtain xT −1 , xT −2 , . . . , x1 , x0 using the
learnable transition kernel. The key to this sampling process
is training the reverse Markov chain to match the actual
time reversal of the forward Markov chain. This requires
adjusting θ to align the joint distribution of the reverse
Markov chain pθ (x0 , x1 , . . . , xT ) closely with that of the forward process q(x0 , x1 , . . . , xT ). We use the KL divergence to
characterize the gap between these two distributions. θ can
be trained by minimizing the KL divergence:
Q

Data

Reverse diffusion process by denoising

Noise

Fig. 4: The schematic diagram of diffusion models.
overview of the most influential research, thus advancing
the field and highlighting promising future directions.

2

A WALK - THROUGH OF DIFFUSION MODELS

Diffusion models constitute a category of likelihoodbased models. They are characterized by a shared principle
of progressively perturbing data through a random noise
process known as ”diffusion” and then removing the noise
to produce samples (see Fig. 4). These models are typically
classified into three subcategories: denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs), noise-conditional score networks
(NCSNs), and stochastic differential equations (SDEs).
DDPMs and their variants have garnered significant
attention owing to their straightforward algorithmic flow
and the ease of integrating conditional controls. In contrast,
NCSNs and SDEs are often subject to detailed mathematical
analysis, given their potential for more efficient sampling
and enhancements in task generalization.

KL(q(x0 , x1 , · · ·, xT )||pθ (x0 , x1 , · · ·, xT ))
2.1

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models

A vanilla DDPM employs two Markov chains: a forward
chain that perturbs data into random noise, and a reverse
chain that converts the noise back to data. The initial diffusion process transforms data x0 ∼ q(x0 ) from a complex
distribution into a latent variable xT in a fixed simple prior
distribution (e.g., standard Gaussian) over T timesteps. At
each diffusion step, Gaussian noise ε is added to the data,
following a hand-designed variance schedule {β1 , . . . , βT },

(i)

= − Eq(x0 ,x1 ,···,xT ) [log pθ (x0 , x1 , · · ·, xT )] + const

(ii)

= − Eq(x0 ,x1 ,···,xT ) [− log p(xT ) −

T
X
pθ (xt−1 |xt )
t=1

q(xt |xt−1 )

(6)

]

≥ E[− log pθ (x0 )] + const.
For better sample quality, a simplified form of loss function is proposed as the optimization target of the model [46]:
h
i
2
Et∼U [[1,T ]],x0 ∼q(x0 ),ϵ∼N (0,I) λ(t)∥ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t)∥ , (7)

IEEE TPAMI

where λ(t) is a positive weighting function. U [[1, T ]] is a
uniform distribution over the set {1, 2, . . . , T }. ϵθ is a deep
network with parameters θ that predicts the noise vector ϵ.
2.2

Noise Conditioned Score Networks

NCSNs are designed to estimate the probabilistic distribution of the target data from the score function, which
guides the sampling process progressively toward the center
of the data distribution. The score function for a specific data
density p(x) is defined as the gradient of the log-density
function, ∇x log p (x), which defines a vector field over the
entire space that data x inhabits, pointing towards the directions along which the probability density function has the
largest growth rate. The Langevin dynamics algorithm uses
the directions provided by these gradients [26] to iteratively
shift from a random prior sample x0 to samples xT in
regions with high density. By learning the score function
of a real data distribution, it can generate samples from any
point in the same space by iteratively following the score
function until a peak is reached, which is defined as
γ
√
xt = xt−1 + ∇x log p(x) + γϵt ,
(8)
2
where t ∼ U [[1, T ]]. γ controls the updating magnitude in
the direction of the score, akin to the learning rate in stochastic gradient descent. The noise ϵt ∼ N (0, I) represents
random normal Gaussian noise at time step t, introducing
random perturbations into the recursive process to address
the issue of getting stuck in local minima. As the time step
T → ∞ and γ → 0, the distribution p (xT ) approaches the
original data distribution p(x). Hence, a generative model
can utilize the above method to sample from p(x) after estimating the score with a network sθ (x, t) ≈ ∇x log p (x).
This network can be trained via score matching [47] to
optimize the objective function presented as follows:
min Et,x0 ,xt [λ(t)∥sθ (xt , t) − ∇xt log p(xt |x0 )∥22 ], (9)
θ

where t ∼ U [[1, T ]] , x0 ∼ p(x0 ), xt ∼ p(xt |x0 ). In practice, because ∇xt log p(xt |x0 ) is unknown, Eq. (9) can only
be solved by those score matching-based methods rather
than be directly solved, limiting the generalization to real
data. According to the manifold hypothesis, conventional
score function estimation methods, including denoising
score matching [47] and sliced score matching [48], when
combined with Langevin dynamics, can lead the resulting
distribution to collapse to a low-dimensional manifold and
thus bring inaccurate score estimation in the low-density
region. To address this issue, annealed Langevin dynamics
perturbs the data with Gaussian noise at different scales
and further proposes an optimization objective under a
monotonically decreasing noise strategy (σt )Tt=1 :
T
xt − x 2
1X
λ(σt )Ep(x),xt [∥sθ (xt , σt )+
∥2 ], (10)
L (θ, σt ) =
T t=1
σt2
where xt ∼ pσt (xt |x) . In inference, one can initiate with
white noise and apply Eq. (8) for a predetermined T . Once
θ∗ is acquired through optimizing the objective conditioned
on T , as shown in Eq. (10), one can use the approximation
∇xt log p (xt ) ≈ sθ∗ (xt , t) as a plug-in estimate to replace
the score function used in the stochastic differential equations [49]. As iterative processes continue, the final sample
is derived from the output obtained at t = 0.

4

2.3

Stochastic Differential Equations

As an extension of NCSNs, SDE and reverse-time SDE
can correspondingly model the forward diffusion process
and reverse diffusion process, where the forward process is
dx
= f¯(x, t) + ḡ(t)ωt ⇔ dx = f¯(x, t)dt + ḡ(t)dω, (11)
dt
where f¯(x, t) and ḡ(t) are diffusion and drift functions
of the SDE. ω ∈ Rn denotes the standard n-dimensional
Wiener process. Based on Eq. (11), the reverse process can
be modeled with a reverse-time SDE [49], which is
2
dx = [f¯(x, t) − ḡ(t) ∇x log pt (x)]dt + ḡ(t)dω̄,
(12)
where dω̄ denotes the infinitesimal negative time step,
defining the standard Wiener process running backward
in time. Solutions to the reverse-time SDE are diffusion
processes that gradually convert noise to data. Note that
the reverse SDE defines the generative process through the
score function ∇x log p(x), a shared concept in Sec. 2.2.
During both train and inference phases, SDE-based
methods rely on practical numerical sampling techniques.
Alongside numerical solutions discussed in Sec. 2.2,
methodologies like Euler-Maruyama discretization and Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) [50] are effective, with
the latter offering better sample efficiency advantages.
If the score function ∇x log p(x) is known, we can solve
the reverse-time SDE easily. By generalizing the scorematching optimization objective in NCSNs to continuous time, we parameterize a time-dependent score model
sθ (xt , t) to estimate the score function in reverse-time SDE,
bringing the same optimization objective as Eq. (9).
Comparing the expansion result of the score function
that uses Bayes’ rule with the noise result obtained from
Eq. (4), it is easy to observe that the training objectives for
DDPMs and NCSNs are equivalent, as shown in Eq. (13).
Namely, the optimization learning objectives of both methods only differ by a fixed scaling factor:
1
ϵθ (xt , t).
(13)
sθ (xt , t) = − √
1 − ᾱt
Moreover, when generalizing to the case of infinite time
steps or noise levels, both DDPMs and NCSNs can be considered as discrete numerical solutions of SDEs in practical
applications. For example, the Variance Preserving (VP) [33]
form of the SDE can be perceived as the continuous version
of DDPM [28], and the corresponding SDE is
q
1
(14)
dx = − β(t)xdt + β(t)dω,
2
where β( Tt ) = T βt as T goes to infinity. NCSNs with
annealed Langevin dynamics are equivalent to the discrete
version of Variance Exploding (VE) SDE [33], which is
s
2
d[σ(t) ]
dx =
dω,
(15)
dt
where σ( Tt ) = σt as T goes to infinity.
2.4

Comparisons With Other Deep Generative Models

In this subsection, we examine the connections between
DMs and other generative models, presenting a unified
mathematical framework for these methods. Flowcharts in
Fig. 5 illustrate their learning objectives, advantages, and
limitations. As highlighted in Fig. 5, a key limitation of DMs
is their sampling inefficiency. To address this, approaches

IEEE TPAMI

Fig. 5: The flowcharts of generative models, where the HQ
image x̃ is generated by the corresponding methods, i.e.,
LACR-VAE [51], LLFlow [52], Vanilla GAN [53], PyDiff [54].
such as [29] draw inspiration from Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs), employing an encoder-decoder framework to accelerate the diffusion process within a compressed latent space.
Both DMs and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [55], [56]
involve mapping data to a latent space, where the generative
process learns to transform the latent representations back
into data. In both cases, the objective function can also be
derived as a lower bound of the data likelihood. However,
while the latent representation in VAEs contains compressed
information about the original image, classical assumptions
suggest that DMs destroy the data after the final step of the
forward process. Furthermore, the latent representations in
diffusion models have the same dimensions as the original
data, whereas VAEs tend to perform better with reduced
dimensions. In this case, some existing work has explored
the use of diffusion models on the latent space of a VAE to
build more efficient models [29], [57], or to construct hybrid
models that fully leverage the advantages of both models.
Normalizing flows (NFs) [58], [59] transform a simple Gaussian distribution into a complex data distribution
through a series of invertible functions with easily computable Jacobian determinants. However, the learnable forward process of NFs, unlike that of DMs, imposes additional
constraints on the architecture due to its requirement for
invertible and differentiable properties. DiffFlow [60], serving as a bridge between these two generative algorithms,
extends both diffusion models and normalizing flows to
enable trainable stochastic forward and reverse processes.
Extending traditional normalizing flows, Continuous
Normalizing Flows (CNFs) employ Ordinary Differential
Equations (ODEs) to model transformations, learning to
predict the velocity field that guides the path between distributions through iterative solving. Rectified Flow [61] pro-

5

poses straightening paths between distributions, reducing
transport costs and accelerating inference. Leveraging this
efficiency, Zhu et al. [62] propose FlowIE, which adapts to diverse degradations via flow rectification and reconstruction.
By straightening probability transfer trajectories, FlowIE significantly speeds up inference while harnessing pretrained
diffusion models. Inspired by Lagrange’s Mean Value Theorem, FlowIE optimizes path estimation, achieving fast and
effective task enhancement in fewer than five steps. Another
notable extension is Flow Matching (FM) [63], which refines
CNFs by regressing vector fields to align with fixed conditional probability paths. FM optimizes these vector fields by
predicting the velocity field that efficiently maps noise to
data, offering a simulation-free training alternative.
Flow-based models and DMs both aim to map simple distributions to complex data distributions. However,
DMs use score-matching to iteratively sample from the
target distribution via a stochastic process, while flow-based
models transform data deterministically through invertible
mappings, allowing for faster computation. Recent largescale generative models, such as Stable Diffusion 3 [64],
have increasingly adopted FM approaches for enhanced
efficiency. In low-level vision, Martin et al. [65] introduce
the first Plug-and-Play FM-based method, which alternates
between gradient descent steps, reprojections along flow
trajectories, and denoising, leading to superior performance
across various inverse problems. In fact, by eliminating
noise perturbations from the diffusion process and utilizing
ODE solvers, results similar to FM can be achieved, suggesting that FM is essentially a specialized variant of DMs.
Given the limited application of FM in low-level vision, this
topic is not further discussed in this paper.
GANs [53] drive the fake data distribution towards the
real one through adversarial learning on the generator and
the discriminator, ensuring that the sampled data resembles real data. Consequently, GANs are extensively utilized
for generating photo-realistic high-resolution images (e.g.,
PGGAN [66] and StyleGAN series [67]). However, GANs
are notorious for their challenging training process due to
their adversarial objective [68] and often suffer from mode
collapse. In contrast, DMs exhibit a stable training process
and offer greater diversity as they are likelihood-based.
Despite these advantages, DMs are less efficient than GANs
as they require multiple iterative steps during inference.
The distinctions between GANs and DMs also manifest
in their ability to manipulate semantic properties within the
latent space. GANs’ latent space has been observed to contain subspaces associated with visual attributes, enabling
attribute manipulation through changes in the latent space
and thus facilitating more precise control over generated
images. However, DMs manipulate semantic properties of
the latent space in a more implicit and less controllable
manner. Fortunately, Song et al. [31] demonstrate that DMs’
latent space exhibits a well-defined structure. Nonetheless,
the exploration of DMs’ latent space has been less extensive
compared to GANs, indicating the need for further research.

3

D IFFUSION MODELS FOR NATURAL IMAGE PRO -

CESSING IN LOW- LEVEL VISION

We first define ”natural images”, which depict common
scenes and objects encountered in daily life, serving as the

IEEE TPAMI

Fig. 6: Linear and nonlinear inverse problems with DMsbased solutions. Figure adapted from [69].
foundational input data in model training and evaluation,
particularly for image restoration. In this section, ”images”
is the ordinary and general notion of natural images.
Low-level vision tasks primarily focus on various illposed inverse problems in the image restoration domain.
These tasks aim to restore degraded and noisy low-quality
(LQ) images to high-quality (HQ) images. The general form
of the forward model can be stated as
y = H(x0 ) + n, y, n ∈ Rn , x0 ∈ Rd ,
(16)
where H(·) : Rd → Rn is the forward operator that maps
the clean image x0 to the distorted data y . n is the noise.
Through rapid development, DM-based models have
achieved significant progress in this domain. Unlike random
sample generation methods such as vanilla DDPM in Sec. 2,
here the degraded LQ images are used as conditional inputs
to guide the latent variables during inference. The models
are expected to learn a parametric approximation to the unknown conditional distribution, posterior p (x|y), through a
stochastic iterative refinement process.
After conducting a comprehensive review of over 300
relevant DM-based works, we classify them from two perspectives, i.e., training manners and application goals.
3.1

DM-based methods with different training manners

Supervised DM-based methods. Supervised DM-based
methods tend to specialize in addressing specific degradation scenarios. They employ the well-designed conditional
mechanism to incorporate distorted images as guidance
during the reverse process, enabling them to tackle several
extreme challenges, such as dehazing and deraining, that
cannot be effectively modeled using the form of Eq. (16).
However, despite yielding promising performance, these
methods need training the DM from scratch using paired
clean and distorted images from a particular degradation
scenario. This results in costly data acquisition and limits the
algorithm’s generalization to other degradation scenarios.
Zero-shot DM-based methods. Zero-shot DM-based techniques, leveraging the image priors extracted from pretrained DMs, offer an appealing alternative as they are
plug-and-play without retraining on a specific dataset. The
underlying concept is based on the understanding that
pre-trained generative models, constructed using extensive
real-world datasets such as ImageNet [70], can serve as a
repository of structure and texture. A key challenge lies in

6

extracting the perceptual priors while preserving the underlying data structure from distorted images. Consequently,
these zero-shot DM methods are often applied to degradation scenarios simplified as linear reverse problems, such
as super-resolution and inpainting. Given the simplicity of
the application process, which only requires replacing the
forward measurement operator, evaluating performance on
linear inverse problems has become a common practice to
assess the generalization of newly proposed DMs. However,
these works are frequently categorized under multi-task
alongside other high-level tasks in existing surveys, without receiving systematic analysis and summary. Hence, we
devote a specific subsection to introducing these DM-based
solvers for general-purpose image restoration in Sec. 3.2.
Discussion. Owing to the differences in training manners,
supervised and zero-shot methods exhibit significant tradeoffs in scalability. Supervised methods, optimized for specific datasets, excel in task-specific performance by aligning
closely with data distributions and degradations. In contrast, zero-shot methods leverage prior knowledge to model
degradations and incorporate the generalizable knowledge
embedded in pre-trained models, offering adaptability and
competitive performance across diverse tasks.
3.2

DM-based methods with different application goals

General-purpose image restoration. This section comprises
most zero-shot methods and several supervised methods.
Notably, most methods mentioned here presuppose prior
knowledge of the forward operator H(·) in Eq. (16), confining their scope to non-blind inverse problems. To adhere
to specific assumptions, further constraints are occasionally
imposed to convert them into linear inverse problems, as
shown in Fig. 6. However, the mapping y → x0 remains
many-to-one, rendering it hard to precisely recover x0 .
Focusing on sampling from the posterior p(x|y), the relationship can be formally established with the Bayes’ rule:
p(x|y) = p(y|x)p(x)/p(y). However, apart from p(y|x0 ) ∼
N (y|A(x0 ), σ 2 I), there exists no explicit dependency between y and xt , where xt denotes the noisy results at time
step t. To solve the intractability of the posterior distribution, Song et al. [31] propose conditional denoising estimator
sθ (x, y, t). The condition y is added to the input of the
estimator to learn an approximation to the posterior score
function ∇xt log p (xt |y) without altering the training object.
The diffusive estimator jointly diffuses x and y and then
learns the posterior approximated from the joint distribution
p (xt , yt ) using denoising score matching. Batzolis et al. [71]
rigorously prove the effect of the above two methods theoretically and analyze the errors caused by the imperfections.
To enhance consistency, [73] and [72] guide the gradient
towards high-density regions by conditioning it through
projections on the subspace. Chung et al. [73] introduce the
manifold constraint after the update step, correcting deviations from the data consistency. Using pre-trained DDPM,
Choi et al. [72] propose Iterative Latent Variable Refinement
(ILVR). As shown in Fig. 7, ILVR is a learning-free method
adopting low-frequency information from y to guide the
generation towards a narrow data manifold. However, such
methods are limited to those noiseless inverse problems.
Besides the above learning-free methods, plug-and-play
posterior sampling provides a favorable choice. Graikos

IEEE TPAMI

7

Iterative Latent Variable
Refinement

Wide
Subset
Narrow
Subset

Latent
variable

Image
manifold

Fig. 7: Guiding generation process in ILVR [72].

Fig. 8: Outline of the IDM [9] framework.
et al. [74] first showcase the viability of directly using
pre-trained DDPMs as plug-and-play modules. Kawar et
al. [75] propose the Denoising Diffusion Restoration Models (DDRM) to reconstruct the missing information in y
within the spectral space of H(·) using Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD). Leveraging pre-trained DMs, DDRM
demonstrates versatility across several tasks, including SR,
deblurring, inpainting, and colorization.
Zhu et al. [76] decouple the data term and the prior
term with Half-Quadratic-Splitting and propose DiffPIR,
handling a wide range of degradation models with different
degradation operators H(·). Wang et al. [77] propose to solve
zero-shot image restoration using Denoising Diffusion Nullspace Model (DDNM). The pseudo-inverse computes the
low-dimensional representation, then decomposed into its
range and null-space contents. By refining the null-space in
the reverse process, DDNM learns missing information in
image inverse problems while fitting only linear operators.
Methods based on Schrödinger bridges, i.e., InDI [78]
and I2SB [79], revisit DMs’ assumptions and depart from
commencing the reverse diffusion process from Gaussian
noise, ensuring efficiency. Chung et al. [80] propose the
Consistent Direct Diffusion Bridge (CDDB), incorporating a
novel data consistency module, to realize the generalization
of Schrödinger bridges on low-level vision tasks.
To mitigate the computational overhead, DMs are shifted
from the image level to the vector level. Rombach et al.
[29] propose latent diffusion models (LDMs), where both
the forward and reverse processes occur in the latent space
obtained through an auto-encoder. To balance latent disentanglement and high-quality reconstructions, Pandey et al.
[81] integrate VAEs within DM and propose DiffuseVAE,
offering novel conditional parameterizations for DMs.
Due to prevalent limitations of various presuppositions,
these models are applied to relatively simple degradation
scenarios that can be abstracted and simplified as linear
inverse problems. Consequently, they are less effective in
real-world blind tasks compared to task-specific methods.
Super-resolution (SR). DMs have shown prowess in gener-

Fig. 9: Overview of RePaint [87].
ating high-quality outputs with intricate details, addressing
over-smoothing and artifacts for high-resolution SR [82].
SRDiff [83] is the pioneering DM-based single-image SR
model, using a pretrained low-resolution encoder and a
conditional noise predictor to produce diverse and realistic
SR predictions. This effectively addresses over-smoothing
and large footprint issues in previous methods [5].
Cascaded Diffusion Models (CDM) [84] proposes to
arrange multiple DMs. The initial model generates lowresolution images based on classes while subsequent models progressively generate images with higher resolutions,
facilitating SR at arbitrary magnifications. Leveraging the
advantages of residual modeling, Yue et al. [85] achieve competitive results in SR within just a few steps. The proposed
ResShift establishes a Markov chain between the HR/LR
image pair by shifting their residual, along with an intricately designed noise schedule for precise controlling. Wang
et al. [86] achieve further breakthroughs in acceleration
with SinSR, which performs SR in a single sampling step.
By deriving a deterministic sampling strategy from SOTA
methods like ResShift, the distilled student models with a
consistency-preserving loss match or even surpass teacher
methods, achieving up to a tenfold speedup in inference.
Gao et al. [9] propose implicit DMs for continuous SR
(in Fig. 8). They introduce a scale-adaptive mechanism to
adjust the ratio of realistic data and use implicit neural representation to capture complex structures across continuous
resolutions. Niu et al. [88] first use a pretrained SR model to
generate high-resolution inputs. Besides, they propose a nth
order sampler to perform a deterministic denoising process,
reducing the iteration number. Wang et al. [43] propose StableSR to leverage prior knowledge contained in pretrained
text-to-image DMs for blind SR. By utilizing a time-aware
encoder, StableSR achieves promising restoration results
without modifying the pretrained synthesis model.
Lin et al. [89] use generative priors to design DiffBIR
for blind image SR, decoupling the restoration process into
two stages. Sun et al. [90] propose CoSeR, which leverages
generative images from a pretrained LDM as implicit priors.
It combines generated results with low-resolution priors
and CLIP’s semantic priors [91] to control the diffusion
process. Yu et al. [45] introduce SUPIR, further leveraging
multi-modal techniques and advanced generative priors. By
incorporating textual prompts into the restoration process,
SUPIR guides the model to better understand and reconstruct severely degraded images. This enhances perceptual
quality and enables user-defined, targeted restoration.
Inpainting. As a probabilistic generative model, DMs exhibit robust generalization across different masks and effec-

IEEE TPAMI

8

Fig. 10: Overview of the method proposed in [94].
tively handle large missing regions. RePaint [11] employs
an enhanced denoising strategy involving resampling iterations to better condition images in Fig. 9. RePaint first
generates a rough estimate and then refines it by a DM
with a Markov random field. To specify a desired inpainted
object, Gebre et al. [92] input an extra target image to guide
the generation of the masked region, providing valuable
exploration in the controllable generation. Zhang et al. [93]
employ both image and text as multi-modal guidance. By
integrating the inverse process with CLIP, semantic information is better encoded, thus enhancing controllability.
Spatial DM [95] employs a Markov random field to
estimate the missing pixels, which considers surrounding
contexts and thus inpaints large missing regions. Saharial et
al. [96] introduce Palette to explore diverse optimization objectives and highlight self-attention. BrushNet [97] is a plugand-play model and embeds pixel-level masked features
into any pre-trained DMs by separating masked features
and noisy latent. Grechka et al. [98] propose a training-free
DM, GradPaint, for gradient-guided inpainting, aiming to
improve the coherence and realism of generated images.
Deblurring. DMs in realistic deblurring often rely on handdesigned networks. Wang et al. [94] first introduce DMs (in
Fig. 10) into deblurring, proposing a “predict-and-refine”
conditional DM. This architecture comprises a deterministic
data-adaptive predictor and a stochastic sampler, refining
the output through residual modeling. Ren et al. [10] introduce multiscale structure guidance in image-conditioned
DPMs for deblurring. Their guidance module projects the
input into a multiscale representation and the guidance
is integrated into intermediate layers as an implicit bias,
thus enhancing robustness. Hierarchical Integration Diffusion Model (HI-Diff) [99] leverages LDM to generate priors
and fuse these priors through a cross-attention mechanism,
enabling generalization in complex scenarios.
Laroche et al. [100] propose a DM-based blind image
deblurring method. This method integrates DMs with the
Expectation-Minimization (EM) estimation to jointly estimate restored images and the unknown blur kernel. Spetlik
et al. [101] propose a DDPM-based method for single-image
deblurring and trajectory recovery of fast-moving objects,
getting competitive results to multi-frame methods. DiffEvent [102] firstly introduces DMs into event deblurring. To
adapt to real-world scenes, DiffEvent builds an Event-Blur
Residual Degradation (EBRD) to provide pseudo-inverse
guidance, enhancing subtle details and handling unknown
degradation. Luo et al. [87] propose the Image Restoration
Stochastic Differential Equation (IR-SDE), whose core is a
mean-reverting SDE with a maximum likelihood objective.
This ensures that the entire SDE will diffuse towards the

Fig. 11: Overview of PyDiff [54].
mean µ (low-quality image) with specific Gaussian noise.
Owing to its ability to simulate the degradation process, IRSDE also excels in super-resolution and inpainting.
Dehazing, deraining, and desnowing. As aforementioned,
real-world degradations like dehazing and deraining are
complex and cannot be effectively modeled by a prior operator H(·). Consequently, they pose challenges for incorporation into general-purpose image restoration frameworks.
Özdenizci et al. [34] present a patch-based image restoration algorithm termed WeatherDiffusion. This approach
facilitates size-agnostic image restoration by employing a
guided denoising process with smoothed noise estimates
across overlapping patches during inference, mitigating the
drawbacks of merging artifacts from independently restored
intermediate results. WeatherDiffusion achieves superior
performance on both weather-specific and multi-weather
image restoration tasks, including dehazing, desnowing,
deraining [103], and raindrop removal.
Building upon IR-SDE, Luo et al. [35] further enhance
it to perform restoration in a low-resolution latent space,
which constitutes a resolution-agnostic architecture. This
enhancement offers another viable option for handling
large-size images. Wang et al. [104] propose a Frequency
Compensation block, equipped with a bank of filters that
collectively amplify the mid-to-high frequencies of an input
signal, enhancing the reconstruction of image details and
improving generalization to real haze scenarios.
Low-light image enhancement. Compared to the blackbox design in other tasks, a plethora of research related to
DMs has emerged in low-light image enhancement (LLIE).
Zhu et al. [105] first introduce DMs into LLIE within spacebased visible cameras. This method effectively reduces computational complexity by diffusing processes on grayscale
images and supplementing features with RGB images. Wu
et al. [106] focus on restoring pure black images, providing
a robust generative network for enhancing low-light images
with diverse outputs. Zhou et al. [54] propose the Pyramid
Diffusion model named PyDiff (illustrated in Fig. 11) for
LLIE, which increases the resolution during the reverse
process, reducing computational burden. Jiang et al. [107] introduce a wavelet-based conditional diffusion model, which
proposes a high-frequency restoration branch module to
provide extra vertical and horizontal details. Wang et al.
[108] integrate DMs with a physics-based exposure model
in the raw image space, where the reverse process can start
from a noisy image, boasting fast inference speed.
Some methods that integrate DMs with other advanced

IEEE TPAMI

9

Fig. 12: The overall framework of Dif-Fusion [114].

Fig. 13: Overview of DiffAMRI [122].

techniques have yielded superior results. Hou et al. [109] introduce a global structure-aware regularization to constrain
the intrinsic structures, along with an uncertainty-guided
regularization to relax constraints on extreme situations.
Diff-Retinex [110] decomposes the image into illumination
and reflectance maps and then uses multi-path DMs to
estimate the clean image. Adopting the opposite strategy,
He et al. [12] propose a Retinex-based LDM to extract reflectance and illumination priors, and then perform decomposition and enhancement using a Retinex-guided transformer, achieving superior results. Yin et al. [111] achieve
an interactive and controllable LLIE model based on a conditional DM. Users can customize the brightness level and
enhance specific target regions with the Segment Anything
Model [112]. To fully utilize the CLIP-based model prior,
Xue et al. [113] introduce multi-modal visual-language information and propose a novel approach named CLIP-Fourier
Guided Wavelet Diffusion (CFWD). CFWD combines the
strengths of wavelet transform, Fourier transform, and CLIP
to guide the DM-based enhancement process in a multiscale
visual-language manner, demonstrating the immense potential of integrating semantic features from CLIP and highfrequency detail recovery from the Fourier transform.
Image fusion. Image fusion can elevate the overall visual quality and facilitate diverse downstream applications.
Yue et al. [114] propose the first DM-based method, DifFusion, for image fusion (see in Fig. 12). By creating a
multi-channel data distribution, Dif-Fusion enhances color
fidelity in infrared-visible image fusion (IVF). Guo et al. [115]
propose GLAD, which leverages DMs to capture the joint
distribution of multi-channel data, addressing texture and
edge blurring. Li et al. [116] apply the DDPM model to
the multi-focus image fusion task, showcasing excellent
performance in terms of noise resistance.
Zhao et al. [117] propose DDFM for IVF and divide the
problem into an unconditional DDPM for utilizing image
generation priors and a maximum likelihood sub-problem
for preserving cross-modal information of source images,
generating visually fidelity results. Diff-IF [118] breaks
down the diffusion process into a conditional DM and
multi-modal fusion knowledge prior, which is used to guide
the forward diffusion process. Cao et al. [119] devise two
injection modulation modules to introduce coarse-grained
style information and fine-grained frequency information,
achieving state-of-the-art results. Yang et al. [120] introduce
LFDT-Fusion for general image fusion, which compresses
inputs into a low-resolution latent space and employs a
transformer-based denoiser to achieve the diffusion process.
Discussion. Various task-specific DM modifications mentioned in Sec. 3.2 impact interpretability and generalizability. For instance, latent space compression [29] facilitates the

acquisition of generalized latent representations, while such
representations are inherently compact, thus reducing interpretability. Hybrid models [4], [12], leverage DM priors to
guide and improve other methods, enhancing controllability
and validating interpretability through explicit prior usage.
Integrating the strengths of different frameworks, hybrid
models also achieve superior generalizability.

4

E XTENDED DIFFUSION MODELS

4.1

Diffusion models for medical image processing

Compared with natural data, medical data acquisition
typically involves more intricate and precise physical imaging processes [121], resulting in poor image quality due to
equipment and usage limitations (e.g., hospital throughput
requirements, patient examination time constraints, and
radiation dosage limits). Leveraging the robust learning
capacity of DMs, these models can implicitly capture knowledge related to imaging physics from dataset distributions.
Hence, DM-based methods have been introduced to address
low-quality medical images degraded by imaging limitations, e.g., limited-angle computed tomography (CT) and
accelerated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
In addition to enhancing low-quality data, another key
application of DM-based methods is the generation of missing modalities. In disease diagnosis, the combination of
multi-modal data assists doctors in making more accurate
diagnoses. However, certain rarer medical images (e.g.,
Positron Emission Computed Tomography (PET) and Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)) unavoidably contain
speckle noise that traditional methods fail to eliminate. Due
to the nature of generative models in detail reconstruction,
diffusion models are well-suited for addressing such issues.
To provide a multi-perspective categorization, we will
classify methods according to their imaging modalities,
covering MRI, CT, multi-modal, and other modalities.
MRI. MRI involves a time-consuming imaging process,
where patient movement can lead to various artifacts.
Hence, medical image reconstruction is necessary to achieve
faster acquisition speed. Chung et al. [122] design a scorebased framework for accelerated MRI reconstruction, shown
in Fig. 13. They train a time-dependent score function
using score matching on magnitude images and employ
the VE SDE for sampling distribution from the pre-trained
score model. By applying data consistency mapping, this
approach effectively handles multi-coil images and exhibits
robust generalization to different subsampling patterns.
Ozturkler et al. [123] propose SMRD, integrating Stein’s
Unbiased Risk Estimator into the sampling stage of DMs
for automatic hyperparameter tuning. SMRD addresses the
reliance on validation-based hyperparameter tuning, offering a more automated solution. Güngör et al. [124] present

IEEE TPAMI

10

Fig. 14: Overview of DOLCE [13].
AdaDiff for MRI reconstruction. AdaDiff uses an adaptive
diffusion prior trained via adversarial mapping over a twophase process: a rapid-diffusion phase for initial reconstruction, followed by an adaptation phase for prior refinements.
Similarly, DiffuseRecon [125] leverages a pre-trained diffusion model with under-sampled signals gradually guiding
the reverse diffusion process. This shows robustness to
varying acceleration factors without requiring retraining.
Korkmaz et al. [126] propose SSDiffRecon, a self-supervised
method that constructs training pairs by randomly masking
under-sampled k-space data. By further combining data
consistency blocks, SSDiffRecon can accurately model complex data distributions, improving reconstruction reliability.
CT. Similar to MRI, limited-angle CT reconstruction has
been a primary focus in CT research, aiming to reduce patient radiation exposure and enhance examination throughput. DM-based methods have shown remarkable performance in this reconstruction task. For example, Liu et
al. [13] introduce DOLCE, a method specifically designed
for limited-angle CT reconstruction within a DDPM framework. Conventionally, the Filtered Back Projection (FBP)
algorithm [127] is employed to map CT images from
sinograms, leveraging the Fourier slice theorem. However,
limited-angle measurements lead to Fourier measurement
loss and subsequently degraded reconstruction outcomes.
Due to the ill-posed nature, directly using DDPM
presents challenges. Following the design in inpainting
tasks, DOLCE [13] integrates the FBP output on limited sinograms as prior information to condition the diffusion model
(Fig. 14). Besides, DOLCE enforces a consistency term in
the denoising iteration to ensure reconstruction consistency
through iterative refinement using proximal mapping in the
inference step to meet the consistency conditions presented
by sinograms. Evaluation on C4KC-KiTS verifies DOLCE’s
effectiveness in generating high-quality CT images.
Multi-modal medical data. MRI and CT are the two most
widely used medical imaging modalities. MRI shows soft
tissues such as vessels and organs in rich contrast while CT
is preferred for imaging hard tissues such as bones and interfaces. Due to their complementary characteristics, multimodality imaging with MRI and CT is often used in clinical
practice. Therefore, the development of a simultaneous CTMRI device is currently a hot research topic, and various
studies have been carried out to propose advanced designs
for such a device [128]–[130]. To translate MR to CT images,
Lyu et al. [131] examine conditional DDPM and SDE models,
employing three different sampling methods.
Meng et al. [132] introduce a Unified Multi-Modal Conditional Score-based Generative Model (UMM-CSGM) to
complete missing modality images. This model is presented
in a conditional SDE, using a multi-in multi-out conditional
score network (mm-CSN) module, to learn cross-modal
conditional distributions. Due to inter-modality differences,
training DM-based models in a zero-shot manner is not

Fig. 15: General pipeline of DenoOCT-DDPM [135].
feasible for image translation and can only be applied to
certain tasks with low difficulties, e.g., CBCT-to-CT image
translation and cross-institutional MRI image translation.
For example, Li et al. [133] propose the Frequency-Guided
Diffusion Model (FGDM), which uses frequency-domain
filters to preserve structure during translation. FGDM enables zero-shot learning and exclusive training on target
domain data, allowing direct deployment for source-totarget domain translation.
Other modalities. PET, crucial for cancer screening, faces
challenges related to low SNR and resolution due to the
limited beam count radiation during scans. To mitigate the
oversmoothing in previous PET denoising methods, Gong
et al. [134] introduce a DDPM-based framework for PET
denoising, termed PET-DDPM. PET-DDPM explores the collaboration of diverse modalities to learn noise distribution
through PET images. The MR image, serving as the prior,
is seamlessly integrated as the input for the denoising network. Experiments reveal that employing MR prior as the
input while embedding PET images as a data-consistency
constraint during inference achieves the best performance.
Hu et al. [135] apply a DDPM to address speckle noise
in OCT volumetric retina data in an unsupervised manner called DenoOCT-DDPM, aiming to address the intrinsic challenges of OCT imaging due to restricted spatialfrequency bandwidth. DenoOCT-DDPM exploits DDPM’s
adaptability to noise patterns and incorporates self-fusion
as a preprocessing step, feeding the DDPM with a clear
reference image for training the parameterized Markov
chain (refer to Fig. 15), thus eliminating speckle noise while
preserving detailed features like small vessels.
4.2

Diffusion models for remote sensing data

The versatility of diffusion models makes them wellsuited for remote sensing data processing. Their applications span a spectrum of challenges encountered in the analysis of diverse remote sensing modalities, including visiblelight images, hyperspectral imaging (HSI), and Synthetic
Aperture Radar (SAR). These tasks encompass but are not
limited to super-resolution [136]–[138], despeckling [139],
[140], cloud removal [8], [141], [142], multi-modal fusion
[119], and cross-modal image translation [143].
We continue categorizing these works based on the
imaging modality, examining the significant impact of DMs.
Visible-light remote sensing data. Visible-light Remote
Sensing Images share a high similarity with natural images.
In this case, Sebaq et al. [144] employ techniques similar
to Imagen [145] for low-resolution generation and reference
the SR pipeline of CDM [84], constructing a powerful framework for high-resolution satellite imagery generation.
Given that RS images suffer from detail loss, Liu et
al. [138] propose the first DM for Remote Sensing Super-

IEEE TPAMI

11
Reverse Diffusion Process

x

0

t

t, t

t

t 1

Variational Spatio-Spectral Module (VS2M)
Variation Inference-based Loss Function
Untrained Spatial Network

arg min ( , )
{ , }

x t 1 vec(

R
t 1

r 1

S (z r ) C (w r ))

2
F

Untrained Spectral Network
r

Fig. 17: An overview of the self-supervised DDS2M in [150].
Fig. 16: Architecture of RSDDM [146] for RS dehazing.
Resolution and introduce a supplement inpainting task
through random masking, aiming to enhance the recovery ability for specific small objects and complex scenes.
Considering that RS images often have higher resolution
and exhibit unusual sizes, Huang et al. [146] introduce an
Adaptive Region-Based DM (in Fig. 16) to address arbitrary
RS image dehazing tasks. They employ the cyclic shift
strategy [147] to eliminate inconsistent color and artifacts.
Hyperspectral imaging. HSI is a crucial modality in remote
sensing with widespread applications. However, due to
the limitations of imaging devices, HSIs suffer from datahungry, noise corruption, and low spatial resolution. Zhang
et al. [148] propose the first DM for HSI generation. The
authors employ a spectral folding technique to achieve
spectral-to-spatial mapping, addressing the convergence
challenges due to their high channel count. Deng et al. [149]
propose a DM-based model for HSI denoising, utilizing random masking, resembling the one in [138], to balance spatial
and spectral information for performance improvement.
As shown in Fig. 17, Miao et al. [150] introduce an
innovative self-supervised DM, DDS2M, for HSI restoration, addressing the data-hungry issue. DDS2M leverages
the variational spatio-spectral module, comprising two untrained networks, each focusing on the spatial and spectral
dimensions, to exploit the intrinsic structural information
of the underlying HSIs. By introducing prior information,
DDS2M can learn the posterior distribution solely using the
degraded HSI. Experiments on HSI denoising and noisy HSI
completion verify the superiority of DDS2M.
To balance the spatial and spectral resolutions of spectral
images, Wu et al. [136] propose HSR-Diff, the first diffusion
model for HSI Super-resolution. The model fuses highresolution multispectral images with low-resolution hyperspectral images (LR-HSI) to obtain HR-HSI. Shi et al. [137]
employ a similar approach and demonstrate the effect of
DM-based models on multiple remote sensing datasets.
Synthetic Aperture Radar. Tuel et al. [151] pioneer the use
of diffusion models for radar remote sensing imagery. This
method highlights, due to limited data, the lack of powerful
feature extractors specific to remote sensing data as a major bottleneck for high-quality generation. Speckle, a type
of signal-dependent multiplicative noise affecting coherent
imaging modalities including SAR images, is addressed
by Perera et al. [139], who introduce DDPM to SAR despeckling. Besides, a new inference strategy based on cycle
spinning is proposed to further improve performance. Xiao
et al. [140] transform multiplicative noise into traditional
additive noise through operations in the logarithmic domain
for DM-based denoising. This method introduces a patch-

shifting and averaging-based algorithm to adapt to inputs
of arbitrary resolutions, further enhancing performance.
Muti-modal remote sensing data. SAR images are robust
to weather conditions but are hard to interpret, lacking
intuitive visual clarity. Hence, SAR often collaborates with
other modalities for cloud removal. Similarly, in DM-based
models, compared to simply modeling cloud removal tasks
as inpainting tasks, results with SAR as auxiliary input
often exhibit higher credibility. Jing et al. [8] introduce an
innovative approach in optical satellite images with DDPM
Feature-Based Network for Cloud Removal (DDPM-CR).
This model incorporates auxiliary SAR data and multilevel
features from DDPM to recover missing information across
various scales. A cloud loss is proposed to balance information recovery in the cloud and no cloud regions. Zhao et al.
[141] propose CRRS that integrates multi-temporal sequence
information into DMs , combining two mainstream cloud
removal concepts in a single framework.
Rui et al. [152] propose the first unsupervised hyperspectral pansharpening method leveraging a pre-trained diffusion model. By projecting hyperspectral images into a lowdimensional subspace, the approach exploits their low-rank
properties to learn distributions efficiently. This method
addresses the complexities of merging low-resolution hyperspectral data with high-resolution panchromatic images,
yielding superior quality and improved generalization compared to traditional Bayesian and deep learning methods.
Seo et al. [143], employing a self-supervised denoiser in
the latent space, train the Brownian-Bridge diffusion model
to achieve SAR to Electro-Optical image translation tasks,
thereby achieving visual-fidelity performance.
4.3

Diffusion models for video processing

The latest research endeavors aim to extend the exploration of DMs into higher-dimensional data, particularly
in video tasks [171]–[175]. However, compared with image,
video processing requires temporal consistency across video
frames. Currently, the number of DM-based video models is
relatively few, only applied in several fundamental tasks.
Video frame prediction and interpolation. Renowned for
remarkable generative capacities, DM-based models are
especially suitable for video prediction and interpolation.
Yang et al. [6] first use DMs in autoregressive video prediction. The two-stage hybrid model initially utilizes RNNs
to obtain deterministic predictions for the next frame, providing sequential priors for the DM. Then the DM focuses
on modeling residuals, whose effect is verified with various
metrics perceptually and probabilistically.
By employing different mask manners for time series,
masked conditional DMs can be trained for prediction

IEEE TPAMI

12

TABLE 1: Datasets for low-level vision. In the column of scales, we present detailed separation information if the dataset
is separated as the training and testing sets. Due to space constraints, only three representative datasets are listed. For a
comprehensive collection, please refer to our repository. Clicking on the dataset will redirect you to its download link.
Tasks

SR

Deblur

Dehaze

Derain

LLIE

IVF

MRI Data
Processing

Datasets

Scales

Sources

Modalities

DIV2K [22]

900/100

NTIRE 2018

Syn

A commonly-used dataset with diverse scenarios and realistic degradations.

Remarks

Urban100 [153]

100

CVPR 2019

Syn

Sourced from urban environments: city streets, buildings, and urban landscapes.

DRealSR [154]

31970

ECCV 2020

Real

Benchmarks captured by DSLR cameras, circumventing simulated degradation.

GoPro [23]

2103/1111

CVPR 2017

Syn

Acquired by high-speed cameras for video quality assessment and restoration.

HIDE [155]

8422

ICCV 2019

Syn

Cover long-distance and short-distance scenarios degraded by motion blur.

RealBlur [156]

3758/980

ECCV 2020

Real

Cover common instances of motion blur, captured in raw and JPEG formats.

RESIDE [157]

13000/990

TIP 2019

Syn+Real

NH-Haze [158]

55

CVRPW 2020

Real

The first non-homogeneous dehazing dataset with realistic haze distribution.

Haze-4K [159]

4000

MM 2021

Syn

A large-scale synthetic dataset for image dehazing with varing distributions.

Rain100H [160]

1800/100

CVPR 2017

Syn

Comprise synthetic datasets with five types of rain streaks for rain removal.

RainDrop [161]

861/239

CVPR 2018

Syn

Image pairs with raindrop degradation, captured using the setup of dual glasses.

GT-RAIN [162]

28217/2100

ECCV 2022

Real

The first paired deraining dataset with real data by controlling non-rain variations.

LOLv1 [163]

485/15

BMVC 2018

Real

The first dataset with image pairs from real scenarios for low-light enhancement.

LOLv2-Real [164]

689/100

TIP 2021

Real

A three-step shooting strategy is used to eliminate intra-pair image misalignments.

LOLv2-Syn [164]

900/100

TIP 2021

Syn

Synthetic dark images mimic real low-light photography via histogram analysis.

RoadScene [165]

221

TPAMI 2020

Real

Aligned Vis-IR image pairs from diverse road scenes with noise-removed IR images.

MSRS [166]

1444

Inf. Fusion 2022

Real

High-quality dataset optimized for contrast and noise in day and night road scenarios.

M3FD [167]

4177

CVPR 2022

Real

A dataset of aligned pairs, featuring various environments, illumination conditions.

FastMRI [168]

8400

arXiv 2018

Real

Raw data and DICOM images for knee and brain MRIs with diverse contrasts.

SKM-TEA [169]

19200/5800

NeurIPS 2021

Real

Raw data, DICOM images, and masks for double echo steady state MRI knee scans.

FastMRI+ [170]

8400

Sci. Data 2022

Real

Add clinical pathology annotations for FastMRI, facilitating disease diagnosis.

Divided into five subsets to highlight diverse sources and heterogeneous contents.

and interpolation. Höppe et al. [176] introduce conditions
through a randomized masking schedule, allowing the
model to be trained conditionally with only slight modifications to the unconditionally trained models. Voleti et
al. [177] employ a similar masking concept but further
propose a blockwise autoregressive conditioning procedure
to facilitate coherent long-term generation. In contrast to
direct modifications of DDPM, Danier et al. [178] first use
LDM in video frame interpolation. They design a vectorquantized autoencoding model for LDM, better recovering
high-frequency details and achieving perceptual superiority.

removal in videos. At the training stage, a novel temporal noise model is introduced to exploit frame-correlated
information in degraded video clips. During inference, the
authors first introduce test-time adaptation to DM-based
methods by proposing a novel proxy task named Diffusion
Tubelet Self-Calibration (Diff-TSC). This allows the model to
adapt in real-time without modifying the training process
and achieve restoration under unseen weather conditions.

Video super-resolution. Early DM-based video works [172],
[173] merely tailor the classical framework to meet data
dimensionality of input-output sequences and train the
models from scratch, resulting in an undeniable computational burden. Given the tremendous success of DMs [29],
one approach is to leverage off-the-shelf pre-trained models
and endow them with temporal modeling capacities by integrating temporal layers into the U-Net architecture. Inspired
by [171], [174], [177], Yuan et al. [179] propose an efficient
DM for text-to-video super-resolution. By inflating textto-image model weights into the video generation framework with an attention-based temporal adapter, this method
achieves high-quality and temporally consistent results.

Large-scale datasets for model pre-training. Several largescale datasets, e.g., ImageNet [70] and CelebA [182], are commonly used for generative model pre-training [183], [184].
ImageNet [70] is a large-scale dataset with over 14 million
natural images spanning over 21k classes, termed ImageNet21K. ImageNet1k, serving as a subset of ImageNet21K,
has 1k classes with about 1k images per class. Besides,
CelebA has 200k facial images, each annotated with 40
attributes, where CelebA-HQ [185] is a subset having 30k
high-resolution facial images. Please see our repository for
more datasets.
Low-level vision datasets for model training. Various
datasets are tailored to accommodate various degradation
modes. For space limitations, we summarize commonly
used datasets for several classical low-level vision tasks in
Table 1. Please refer to our repository for more information.
In practice, DM-based models are typically pre-trained on
large-scale datasets to learn general features and structures,
before being fine-tuned on specific low-level vision datasets
to address the specific degradation issues.

Striving for Spatial Adaptation and Temporal Coherence
(SATeCo), Chen et al. [180] propose a novel video SR approach SATeCo, which freezes pre-trained parameters and
optimizes spatial feature adaptation (SFA) and temporal
feature alignment (TFA) modules. Experiments validate the
effect of the modules in preserving spatial fidelity and
enhancing temporal feature alignment.
Video restoration. Limited DM-based algorithms focus on
video restoration, showing a promising future direction.
Yang et al. [181] propose a novel Diffusion Test-Time Adaptation (Diff-TTA) method for all-in-one adverse weather

5

EXPERIMENTS

5.1

Datasets

5.2

Evaluation metrics

Distortion-based metrics. Several commonly used metrics
are introduced here. Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR)

IEEE TPAMI

13

TABLE 2: Results of DM-based 4× SR methods.
Methods

DIV2K [22]

TABLE 3: Results of DM-based motion deblurring methods.
Gopro [23]

HIDE [155]

Time

Parameters

PSNR↑

SSIM↑

LPIPS↓

PSNR↑

SSIM↑

LPIPS↓

[s/image]

[M]

Blurred image

25.64

0.793

0.29

23.95

0.763

0.33

-

-

137.2

DvSR [94]

33.23

0.963

0.08

30.07

0.928

0.09

-

-

-

-

IR-SDE [87]

30.70

0.901

0.06

28.34

0.914

0.10

4.3

137.2

0.13

59.5

116.6

MSGD [10]

31.19

0.943

0.06

29.14

0.910

0.09

-

-

0.10

0.3

26.5

DiffIR [4]

33.20

0.963

0.08

31.55

0.947

0.10

0.436

26.91

51.79

98.91

HI-Diff [99]

33.33

0.964

0.08

31.46

0.945

0.11

2.280

28.5

Urban100 [153]

Time

Parameters

PSNR↑

SSIM↑

LPIPS↓

PSNR↑

SSIM↑

LPIPS↓

[s/image]

[M]

Bicubic

25.36

0.643

0.31

24.26

0.628

0.34

-

-

IR-SDE [87]

25.90

0.657

0.23

26.63

0.786

0.18

63.9

CDPMSR [190]

27.43

0.712

0.19

26.98

0.801

0.16

IDM [9]

27.13

0.703

0.18

26.76

0.657

DiffIR [4]

29.13

0.730

0.09

26.05

0.776

ResDiff [191]

27.94

0.723

0.23

27.43

0.824

0.14

Methods

TABLE 4: Results of zero-shot DM-based inpaint- TABLE 5: Results of DM-based low-light enhancement methods (*: using
ing methods using the same pre-trained model the gt mean strategy, † : a multi-modal method, →: cross-dataset transfer
learning tests from LOLv2-Real (v2R), LOLv2-Syn (v2S) to LOLv1 (v1).).
with 552.8M parameters (LPIPS ↓).
Methods

ImageNet 1K [70]

v2R → v1 [163]

v2S → v1 [163]

Time

Parameters

PSNR↑

LPIPS↓

PSNR↑

LPIPS↓

PSNR↑

LPIPS↓

PSNR↑

LPIPS↓

[s/image]

[M]

Low-Light Image

9.71

0.52

11.22

0.38

7.77

0.56

7.77

0.56

-

-

176.7

PyDiff* [54]

24.01

0.23

19.60

0.22

24.25

0.14

18.13

0.34

0.28

97.9

0.125

4.9

Diff-Retinex [110]

20.17

0.10

24.30

0.06

18.83

0.13

16.66

0.39

0.24

56.9

0.111

8.2

GSAD* [109]

28.82

0.09

28.67

0.04

27.29

0.09

20.48

0.36

0.43

17.2

0.040

0.071

146.9

Reti-Diff [12]

22.97

0.08

27.53

0.03

20.25

0.11

17.84

0.34

0.08

26.1

0.033

0.069

186.5

CFWD† [113]

29.86

0.19

24.42

0.10

-

-

-

-

0.81

22.1

CelebA-HQ [185]

Time

v2R [164]

Methods

Half

Narrow

Wide

Half

Narrow

Wide

[s/image]

Masked image

0.502

0.347

0.297

0.474

0.389

0.279

-

RePaint [11]

0.323

0.072

0.156

0.199

0.039

0.072

DDRM [75]

0.385

0.211

0.231

0.273

0.140

DDNM [77]

0.408

0.101

0.185

0.257

0.071

CoPaint [192]

0.307

0.078

0.138

0.188

Tiramisu [193]

0.286

0.079

0.125

0.189

v2S [164]

TABLE 6: Results of DM-based infrared and visible image TABLE 7: Results of DM-based accelerated MRI reconstrucfusion methods.
tion methods (single coil).
Methods

MSRS [166]

M3FD [167]

Time

Parameters

SSIM↑

MI↑

Qabf↑

[s/image]

[M]

0.58

0.94

2.52

0.49

0.95

37.28

552.8

0.58

0.81

2.96

0.58

0.85

0.3763

416.5

MI↑

Qabf↑

DDFM [117]

2.35

Dif-Fusion [114]

3.34

SSIM↑

GLAD [115]

3.34

0.63

0.92

3.24

0.63

0.86

-

-

Diff-IF [118]

3.45

0.69

0.88

3.19

0.59

0.90

0.4588

23.7

LFDT-Fusion [120]

3.58

0.68

0.90

3.27

0.63

0.93

0.5469

21.3

quantifies the pixel-wise disparity between a corrupted image and its clean image by computing their mean squared
error, while Structural Similarity (SSIM) assesses the likeness between distorted and clean images across three aspects, including contrast, brightness, and structure. Mutual
Information (MI) [186] and Qabf [187] are two important fusion metrics, where MI evaluates the amount of information
transferred from source images to the fused image and Qabf
focuses on the preservation of edge information.
Inception-based metrics. Learned Perceptual Image Patch
Similarity (LPIPS) [188] and Fréchet inception distance (FID)
[189] are two representative metrics. LPISP uses the pretrained AlexNet as a feature extractor and adjusts linear
layers to emulate human perception. Besides, FID assesses
the fidelity and diversity of generated images by computing
the Fréchet distance of their reference images.
Human-centric evaluations. Human-centric evaluation is
a subjective assessment method, where participants select
the image verifying the most effective performance from
a set of images. For fairness, anonymizing the method
and randomizing the order is essential. Human assessment
scores are calculated using the Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
derived from a pool of participants. A higher MOS indicates
superior perceptual quality as perceived by humans.
Downstream application-based evaluations. Apart from
improving visual quality, generating those enhanced images
that can facilitate high-level vision tasks, such as image
segmentation [13], [194], is also a significant object. Hence,
the evaluation of various methods extends to examining the
impact on real-world vision-based applications.
5.3

Experimental results

The runtime of all algorithms was measured at a resolution of 256 × 256 using an RTX 4090 GPU. For methods that

Methods
Score-MRI [122]
DiffuseRecon [125]
SMRD [123]
SSDiffRecon [126]
AdaDiff [124]

FastMRI [168] R=4x
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
31.1
31.7
36.5
40.1
40.2

0.76
0.71
0.89
0.97
0.96

FastMRI [168] R=8x
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
28.4
29.9
32.4
35.1
37.2

0.77
0.61
0.80
0.93
0.94

Time
[s/image]

Parameters
[M]

40.8628
8.654
463.4216
278.61
10.2157

61.43
149.59
94.13
78.58
39.72

are not publicly available, their cells are marked with “-”.
Results on super-resolution. The results for DM-based
models on 4× image SR, tested on DIV2k [22] and Urban100
[153], are listed in Table 2. We find that IDM [9] and DiffIR [4] perform well on LPIPS. They leverage preprocessed
features as conditional input, enhancing perceptual quality.
Resdiff [191] performs well on PSNR and SSIM. This is
because Resdiff focuses on residual information, ensuring
salient consistency. Visualization is presented in Fig. 18.
Results on deblurring. We evaluate five DM-based methods
on the motion deblurring task using the Gopro [23] and
HIDE [155] datasets. As shown in Table 3, DiffEvent [102]
and HI-Diff [99] achieve competitive performance on PSNRs
and SSIMs. DiffEvent is enabled to achieve both low-light
recovery and image deblurring by introducing a learnable
decomposer. In contrast, MSGD [10] introduces a multi-scale
structural bootstrap to better sample from the target condition distribution, hence the best performance on perceptual
metrics. The qualitative analysis is presented in Fig. 18.
Results on zero-shot inpainting. As shown in Table 4
and Fig. 18, the experimental results demonstrate that
Tiramisu [193] consistently outperforms others in most scenarios, particularly excelling in cases with large masks. This
is because Tiramisu uses TPMs to constrain the generation
process of natural images. In contrast, the Repaint [11]
stands out in narrower regions by sampling from the given
pixels during the reverse iterations.
Results on low-light image enhancement. Basic experiments are conducted on LOLv2-Real (v2R) [164] and LOLv2Syn (v2S) [164], with the results presented in Table 5
and Fig. 18. GSAD [109] shows superior performance
in PSNR, while Reti-Diff [12] achieves competitive performance in LPIPS [188]. CFWD [113] first introduces
multi-modal into diffusion-based low-light enhancement,

14

Motion
Deblurring

Super
Resolution

IEEE TPAMI

Bicubic

IR-SDE

DiffIR

Reference

LQ

RePaint

CoPaint

Tiramisu

Reference

Visible

Infrared

Dif-Fusion

Diff-IF

LFDT-Fusion

LQ

IR-SDE

DiffIR

HI-Diff

Reference

LQ

GSAD

CFWD

Reti-Diff

Reference

ScoreMRI

SMRD

SSDiffRecon

AdaDiff

Reference

Infrared-visible
Image Fusion

Accelerated MRI
Reconstruction

Low-light Image
Enhancement

Zero-shot
Image Inpainting

LQ

Fig. 18: Qualitative comparisons for DM-based methods on six commonly investigated tasks.
reaching the best real-world performance. To explore how
datasets, such as synthetic versus real-world data, shape
performance trends, we conduct further cross-dataset transfer tests. Considering that the ultimate goal of low-level
vision methods is practical application under real-world
degradation, we tested models trained from the real-world
dataset (v2R) and the synthetic dataset (v2S) on the realworld dataset LOLv1 (v1) [163] respectively. Evidently, models trained on real-world data consistently outperform those
trained on synthetic data in practical scenarios. Noting that
GSAD [109] and PyDiff [54] employ the “gt mean” strategy,
which involves fine-tuning the brightness of the generated
results using the ground truth, thus producing much more
impressive results than others in PSNR.
Results on infrared and visible image fusion. The results
are reported in Table 6 and Fig. 18. DDFM [117] designs
a likelihood rectification module and achieves impressive
SSIM, indicating strong structural fidelity. Diff-IF [118]
stands out with a strong Qabf [187], hinting at its effect enhancing image quality. LFDT-Fusion [120], combining LDM
and transformer, achieves the highest MI [186] on MSRS and
gets competitive scores in Qabf and SSIM on M3FD.
Results on accelerated MRI reconstruction. As presented
in Table 7 and Fig. 18, AdaDiff [124] achieves the best overall
performance, particularly in the R=8x scenario. SSDiffRecon
[126] combines a conditional DM with data-consistency projections, showing strong performance, particularly in R=4x,
where it closes to AdaDiff [124] in both PSNR and SSIM.
The visualizations presented in Fig. 18 further confirm that
both methods generate high-quality reconstruction results.
Discussion of model scalability. The analysis indicates

that computational costs and parameter counts are not
necessarily correlated with model performance. Notably, IRSDE [87], a supervised method, achieves outstanding results in both super-resolution and motion deblurring tasks,
demonstrating exceptional multi-task scalability. This observation suggests that integrating an optimal amount of
learnable parameters can enhance a model’s adaptability
to complex real-world degradations, thereby improving its
scalability. Furthermore, these findings provide valuable
insights for addressing the limitations of current zero-shot
methods, which, despite their strong scalability, remain confined to linear degradation scenarios.

6

F UTURE DIRECTIONS

6.1

Mitigating the limitations of DMs

Due to the high computational overhead, DMs encounter
barriers to be applied in low-level vision tasks. Two viable
ways are listed and discussed to mitigate this challenge.
Reducing sample steps. Various efforts, extending beyond
low-level vision, have been undertaken to enhance the sampling efficiency of DM: (1) Modeling the diffusion process
with a non-Markov Chain, such as DDIM [27]. (2) Designing
efficient ODE solvers [50]. (3) Using knowledge distillation
to reduce sampling steps [195]. (4) Performing DMs on compressed latent spaces [29]. (5) Introducing cross-modality
priors with conditional mechanisms [196], [197]. (6) Rethinking diffusion process modeling with more efficient
latent variable transitions (e.g., residual-based methods in
Resshift [85]) and optimized noise design [198].

IEEE TPAMI

15

s.t. xˆ  = Φ ( y , z ; ωe )
Enhancement Φ

min

xˆ 

ωd , ωe

d

(  ( xˆ ; ω ) )


d

Segmentation 

Segmentation-oriented enhancement
: Optimal enhancement solution
: Optimal segmentation solution

Φ



Φ+

(a) Shift in pareto-frontier [80].

(b) Bi-level optimization [24].

Fig. 19: Two strategies to amalgamate the strengths of DMs
with the traits of low-level vision in Sec. 6.2.
These efforts reduce sampling steps to 10-20, with some
studies, e.g., SinSR [86], even getting results in a single
step, ensuring faster reconstruction. DDRM [75] achieves an
inference time reduction to 5 seconds for a single 256 × 256
image by using the sampling strategy of DDIM [27]. Besides,
some studies [199], [200] initialize networks by sampling
from low-quality images or one-step reconstruction results
of baseline networks, streamlining the learning target. However, despite notable progress, the overall computational
cost remains high, particularly for high-resolution images,
presenting a substantial gap from real-time applications.
Compressing model consumption. The deployment of DMbased models in low-resource environments, such as edge
devices, faces challenges due to their immense parameter
size and computational complexity. Apart from employing fewer-step inference, researchers can explore architectural optimizations to address this issue, including model
quantization, pruning, and knowledge distillation. Zhang et
al. [201] combine automated layer pruning with normalized
feature distillation to compress models. Castells et al. [202]
propose EdgeFusion, an optimized model for deploying
SDMs on Neural Processing Units, which leverages advanced distillation techniques and model-level tiling to facilitate rapid inference. However, current methods primarily
focus on generation tasks. In the future, these techniques are
expected to be extended to low-level vision tasks, leveraging
specific properties of each task for model compression.
6.2 Amalgamating the strengths of DMs with the traits
of low-level vision
The greatest trait of low-level vision lies in the diversity of evaluation criteria, including visual fidelity, content invariance, and downstream task-based evaluations.
DM-based methods, generating visual fidelity results, also
should ensure the content invariance of the original one and
the generated result and facilitate downstream tasks.
Perception-distortion trade-off. DM-based methods generate visually appealing results and excel in inception-based
metrics, such as LPIPS [188] and FID [189]. However, their
high diversity often leads to challenges in maintaining
content consistency, resulting in suboptimal performance in
those distortion-based metrics such as PSNR and SSIM.
One potential solution involves designing hybrid models
that integrate DMs with CNN-based or Transformer-based
frameworks [4], [12]. These hybrid models have shown
promising results, particularly in improving distortionbased metrics. Besides, Pareto-frontiers are introduced as a

comprehensive indicator to evaluate both perception and
distortion and have proven the positive shift of the multiscale guidance mechanism [80] that enhances coarse sharp
image structures (in Fig. 19 (a)). However, breakthrough
progress has not yet been made and further explorations
about novel mixed structure and new metrics are expected.
Downstream task-friendly designs. Enabling reconstructed
images to better serve downstream tasks is a continuous
endeavor in low-level vision research [44], [203], [204]. This
pursuit manifests in three primary approaches with DMs.
First, as shown in Fig. 19 (b), several strategies [24],
[205] adopt bi-level optimization to jointly optimize the
networks of both the low-level vision task and the downstream task, such as image segmentation and object detection. By jointly optimizing the enhancement network with
constraints from both itself and the downstream task, these
methods aim to produce visually appealing results while
enhancing downstream performance. Besides, He et. al [24]
propose feature-level information aggregation between lowlevel vision tasks and downstream tasks instead of the
previous image-level manner, improving performance with
deep constraints. Inspired by the adversarial attacks, which
introduce slight perturbations to cause original methods to
fail, Sun et. al [206] propose adding slight noise to dehazed
images. This strategy enhances downstream detection performance without altering the visual outcome. However,
these methods are often tailored to specific downstream
tasks. There remains a need for a unified strategy, especially DM-based solutions that can generate visually friend
results, to optimize generated images for a wide range of
downstream tasks, which awaits further exploration.
6.3

Tackling the inherent challenges of low-level vision

Low-level vision tasks have several inherent challenges,
including generalizability, data volume, and controllability.
Real-world image restoration. Two ways help DM-based
methods to address real-world scenarios [207], i.e., distortion invariant learning (DIL) and distortion estimation (DE).
DIL, renowned for its degradation-invariant representation and structural information preservation [208], can
enhance DM-based methods by incorporating a distortioninvariant noise predictor and condition. This enables these
methods to generalize effectively to diverse and even unknown degradations. Pioneering efforts have focused on
redesigning the condition module to achieve distortioninvariant conditions, as demonstrated in works such as DifFace [209] and DR2 [210]. Notably, the effectiveness of such
conditions also relies on DIL, warranting further research.
Moreover, DE techniques, extracting prior knowledge of
degradation processes, are also urgently needed to extend
the zero-shot diffusion models to real-world applications.
Even though explicit results cannot be obtained, the powerful image synthesis capability of DMs can be utilized to
convert synthetic datasets into real-world paired datasets,
which will be discussed in detail in the following subsection.
Data generation for data-hungry fields. Data hungry is a
prevalent challenge in low-level tasks, often stemming from
limitations inherent in imaging devices and scenarios.
While the unsupervised training is one avenue, many
existing approaches [24] resort to data generation strategies

IEEE TPAMI

to create pseudo image pairs. These pairs typically consist
of generated degraded low-quality images paired with their
corresponding original high-quality counterparts. This is
a promising way for DM-based methods, although with
limited explorations, for their powerful generation capacity.
Moreover, certain extreme tasks suffer from severely limited data availability due to the difficulty or costliness of
data acquisition, as seen in Photoacoustic data [211] and
Cryo-electron microscopy data [212]. He et. al [68] propose
leveraging existing data to generate more training data with
GAN and thus enhance the generalizability of the method.
This strategy aligns well with the DM-based methods, offering stable training conditions. Furthermore, controllable
data generation, facilitated by user interaction, presents a
promising approach to filtering out negative data that could
otherwise affect stable performance.
Controllable and interactive low-level vision. Enhancing
the controllability of low-level vision methods, enabling
them to discern what and where users desire recovery, is of
paramount importance. This focus has persisted over time,
with efforts including the integration of human perceptionrelated loss functions [213] and interactive guidance priors
[24], [214]. Recently, the utilization of vision prompts facilitated by Vision-Language models [215] has provided a
means for existing low-level vision methods to explicitly
incorporate and interact with prompts within their networks, thereby achieving improved control and restoration
effects [216]. Given that these vision prompts can act as
interactive priors to curb the excessive diversity inherent
in DM-based methods, leveraging Vision-Language models
to develop controllable and interactive DM-based methods
shows promise.
Moreover, future efforts should address real-world scenarios that involve multiple degradations. Zheng et al. [217]
introduce a novel DM-based method named DiffUIR, employing a selective hourglass mapping technique. DiffUIR
combines shared distribution mapping and robust conditional guidance based on Residual Denoising Diffusion
Models [218] to improve image restoration performance. Improving the internal mechanisms of deep learning to better
learn the distribution of multi-task degradations represents
a promising direction for future DM-based explorations.
6.4 Empowering low-level vision through multi-modal
advances
Multi-modal technology has advanced rapidly in image
generation, revolutionizing the integration of images, text,
and other relevant data. This section seeks to draw inspiration from advancements in generation to foster the development of low-level vision using multi-modal techniques.
Text prompt for low-level vision. Leveraging multi-modal
condition control, recent low-level vision methods combine
text-based inputs to harness the potential of CLIP in pretrained DMs. This integration has led to notable performance improvements across various tasks [90], [113], enabling user-centered, customized image restoration [45], and
even achieving all-in-one restoration [219], [220].
By using pre-trained DMs and multi-modal prompt engineering, these models demonstrate superiority over taskspecific methods, showcasing robustness and adaptability in

16

zero-shot settings. Ai et al. [220] introduce MPerceiver, the
first multi-modal prompt framework that leverages Stable
Diffusion’s generative priors for all-in-one image restoration. MPerceiver employs a dual-branch architecture with
a cross-modal adapter to convert CLIP image embeddings
into degradation-aware text prompts. AutoDIR [219] leverages text prompts to enable customizable image restoration
for multiple degradation types, using a CLIP model finetuned with semantic-agnostic constraints to detect dominant
degradations and generate text prompts for DM-based image restoration, supplemented by user inputs.
Extending to additional modalities beyond text. Multimodal approaches extending beyond text and images show
great potential for low-level vision tasks. Incorporating
audio as an additional modality could further boost performance, particularly in video-related tasks where audio
cues serve as valuable contextual information. The temporal
and auditory alignment can provide insights into motion
patterns or environmental conditions, aiding model understanding. Moreover, integrating audio could enable more
fluid user interactions in real time, allowing for dynamic
refinements during the restoration process. For example,
models like Mini-Omni2 [221] illustrate the potential of combining audio, vision, and text within a unified framework,
fostering more interactive and adaptive systems.
Embodied Intelligence for low-level vision. Recently, Embodied Intelligence [222] has gained significant traction,
promoting the integration of multisensory methods into
AI systems. This paradigm emphasizes interaction with
the physical world through various sensory inputs, e.g.,
vision, touch, audio, and environmental data. It provides a
foundation for low-level vision to incorporate diverse multimodal information for improved performance [223].
Leveraging multisensory inputs offers a transformative
opportunity to tackle real-world challenges [224]. For instance, humidity and temperature sensors can optimize
dehazing methods by providing real-time environmental
context. Tactile sensors, on the other hand, can enhance finegrained texture restoration by using touch-based feedback
to inform surface detail reconstruction in medical imaging
and material analysis. Besides, integrating motion sensors,
such as accelerometers and gyroscopes, can improve deblurring, strengthening robustness in dynamic environments.
The integration of these technologies within Embodied
Intelligence suggests a future where low-level vision models
become more adaptable, closely mimicking human sensory
perception and interaction with the physical world.

7

C ONCLUSIONS

This survey offers an extensive examination of diffusion
models applied in low-level vision tasks, a gap overlooked
in previous surveys. Our review covers both advances and
practical implementations. Firstly, we identify and discuss
various generic diffusion modeling frameworks. We then
propose a detailed categorization of diffusion models used
in low-level vision from multiple angles. Lastly, we highlight limitations of existing diffusion models and propose
future research directions. Advances in low-level vision
tasks using these models are emerging in more complex and
higher-dimensional areas, including 3D objects, locomotion,
and 4D scenes, highlighting the need for continued research.

IEEE TPAMI

17

R EFERENCES

[33]

[1]

[34]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

Z. Wang, J. Chen, and S. C. Hoi, “Deep learning for image superresolution: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 3365–3387, 2020.
S. Biyouki and H. Hwangbo, “A comprehensive survey on deep
neural image deblurring,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04719, 2023.
Y. Liu, G. Zhao, B. Gong, Y. Li, R. Raj, and N. Goel, “Improved
techniques for learning to dehaze and beyond: A collective
study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.00202, 2018.
B. Xia, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Diffir: Efficient diffusion
model for image restoration,” arXiv arXiv:2303.09472, 2023.
C. He, K. Li, G. Xu, Y. Zhang, R. Hu, Z. Guo, and X. Li,
“Degradation-resistant unfolding network for heterogeneous image fusion,” in ICCV, pp. 12611–12621, 2023.
R. Yang, P. Srivastava, and S. Mandt, “Diffusion probabilistic
modeling for video generation,” CoRR, vol. abs/2203.09481, 2022.
T. Wang, K. Zhang, and Z. Shao, “Lldiffusion: Learning degradation representations in diffusion models for low-light image
enhancement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14659, 2023.
R. Jing, F. Duan, F. Lu, M. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “Denoising
diffusion probabilistic feature-based network for cloud removal
in sentinel-2 imagery,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 9, p. 2217, 2023.
S. Gao, X. Liu, and B. Zeng, “Implicit diffusion models for
continuous super-resolution,” in CVPR, pp. 10021–10030, 2023.
M. Ren, M. Delbracio, and H. Talebi, “Multiscale structure guided
diffusion for image deblurring,” in ICCV, pp. 10721–10733, 2023.
A. Lugm, M. Danel, and F. Yu, “Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in CVPR, pp. 61–71, 2022.
C. He, C. Fang, Y. Zhang, K. Li, L. Tang, and Z. Guo, “Reti-diff:
Illumination degradation image restoration with retinex-based
latent diffusion model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11638, 2023.
J. Liu and R. Anirudh, “A model-based probabilistic diffusion
framework for limited-angle ct reconstruction,” in ICCV, 2023.
C. Saxena and D. Kourav, “Noises and image denoising techniques: a brief survey,” IJEATE, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 878–885, 2014.
C. He, X. Wang, and L. Deng, “Image threshold segmentation
based on glle histogram,” in CPSCom, pp. 410–415, IEEE, 2019.
C. He, K. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Tang, Y. Zhang, Z. Guo, and X. Li,
“Camouflaged object detection with feature decomposition and
edge reconstruction,” in CVPR, pp. 22046–22055, 2023.
C. He, K. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Xu, and L. Tang, “Weakly-supervised
concealed object segmentation with sam-based pseudo labeling
and multi-scale feature grouping,” NeurIPS, 2024.
F. Xiao, P. Zhang, C. He, R. Hu, and Y. Liu, “Concealed object
segmentation with hierarchical coherence modeling,” in CAAI,
pp. 16–27, Springer, 2023.
L. Xu, H. Wu, and C. He, “Multi-modal sequence learning
for alzheimer’s disease progression prediction with incomplete
variable-length longitudinal data,” Med. Image Anal., 2022.
J. Su, B. Xu, and H. Yin, “A survey of deep learning approaches
to image restoration,” Neurocomputing, vol. 487, pp. 46–65, 2022.
A. M. Ali, B. Benjdira, and A. Koubaa, “Vision transformers in
image restoration: A survey,” Sensors, p. 2385, 2023.
E. Agustsson and R. Timofte, “Ntire17 challenge on single image
super-resolution: Dataset and study,” in CVPRW, 2017.
S. Nah and T. Hyun Kim, “Deep multi-scale convolutional network for dynamic scene deblurring,” in CVPR, pp. 883–891, 2017.
C. He, K. Li, G. Xu, J. Yan, and L. Tang, “Hqg-net: Unpaired
medical image enhancement with high-quality guidance,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., 2023.
J. Sohl-Dickstein and E. Weiss, “Deep unsupervised learning
using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in ICML, 2015.
Y. Song and S. Ermon, “Generative modeling by estimating
gradients of the data distribution,” NeurIPS, 2019.
J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502, 2020.
J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,” NeurIPS, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
R. Rombach and A. Blattmann, “High-resolution image synthesis
with latent diffusion models,” in CVPR, pp. 684–695, 2022.
A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion
probabilistic models,” in ICML, pp. 8162–8171, PMLR, 2021.
Y. Song and J. Sohl, “Score-based generative modeling through
stochastic differential equations,” arXiv arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
D. Watson and W. Chan, “Learning fast samplers for diffusion
models by differentiating through sample quality,” in ICLR, 2021.

[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]

P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol, “Diffusion models beat gans on image
synthesis,” NeurIPS, pp. 8780–8794, 2021.
O. Özdenizci and R. Legenstein, “Restoring vision in adverse
weather conditions with patch-based denoising diffusion models,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 2023.
Z. Luo, F. K. Gustafsson, Z. Zhao, J. Sjölund, and T. B. Schön,
“Refusion: Enabling large-size realistic image restoration with
latent-space diffusion models,” in CVPR, pp. 1680–1691, 2023.
F.-A. Croitoru and V. Hondru, “Diffusion models in vision: A
survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 2023.
L. Yang, Z. Zhang, Y. Song, S. Hong, R. Xu, Y. Zhao, W. Zhang,
B. Cui, and M.-H. Yang, “Diffusion models: A comprehensive
survey of methods and applications,” ACM Comput. Surv., 2022.
C. Zhang and C. Zhang, “Text-to-image diffusion model in generative ai: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07909, 2023.
Y. Huang, J. Huang, Y. Liu, and M. Yan, “Diffusion model-based
image editing: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17525, 2024.
S. Parida, V. Srinivas, B. Jain, and R. Naik, “Survey on diverse
image inpainting using diffusion models,” in PCEMS, 2023.
B. B. Moser, A. S. Shanbhag, F. Raue, S. Frolov, S. Palacio,
and A. Dengel, “Diffusion models, image super-resolution and
everything: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00736, 2024.
X. Li and Y. Ren, “Diffusion models for image restoration and
enhancement–a survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09388, 2023.
J. Wang and Z. Yue, “Exploiting diffusion prior for real-world
image super-resolution,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07015, 2023.
C. Saharia and J. Ho, “Image super-resolution via iterative refinement,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., pp. 713–726, 2022.
F. Yu, J. Gu, Z. Li, J. Hu, X. Kong, X. Wang, et al., “Scaling up
to excellence: Practicing model scaling for photo-realistic image
restoration in the wild,” in CVPR, pp. 25669–25680, 2024.
J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,” NeurIPS, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
P. Vincent, “A connection between score matching and denoising
autoencoders,” Neural Comput., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1661–1674, 2011.
Y. Song, S. Garg, J. Shi, and S. Ermon, “Sliced score matching: A
scalable approach to score estimation,” in UAI, pp. 574–584, 2020.
B. D. Anderson, “Reverse-time diffusion equation models,”
Stochastic Processes Appl., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 313–326, 1982.
E. Weinan, “A proposal on machine learning via dynamical
systems,” Commun. Math. Stat., vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 1–11, 2017.
X. Wu, Z. Lai, J. Zhou, X. Hou, et al., “Light-aware contrastive
learning for low-light image enhancement,” TOMM, 2024.
Y. Wang, R. Wan, W. Yang, H. Li, L.-P. Chau, and A. Kot,
“Low-light image enhancement with normalizing flow,” in AAAI,
vol. 36, pp. 2604–2612, 2022.
I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, and M. Mirza, “Generative
adversarial nets,” NeurIPS, 2014.
D. Zhou and Z. Yang, “Pyramid diffusion models for low-light
image enhancement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10028, 2023.
D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
L. Deng, C. He, and G. Xu, “Pcgan: A noise robust conditional
generative adversarial network for one shot learning,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., pp. 25249–25258, 2022.
K. Pandey and A. Mukherjee, “Vaes meet diffusion models:
Efficient and high-fidelity generation,” in NeurIPSW, 2021.
L. Dinh and Y. Bengio, “Nice: Non-linear independent components estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation
using real nvp,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.
Q. Zhang and Y. Chen, “Diffusion normalizing flow,” Adv. neural
inf. process. syst., vol. 34, pp. 16280–16291, 2021.
X. Liu, C. Gong, and Q. Liu, “Flow straight and fast: Learning
to generate and transfer data with rectified flow,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.03003, 2022.
Y. Zhu, W. Zhao, A. Li, Y. Tang, et al., “Flowie: Efficient image
enhancement via rectified flow,” in CVPR, pp. 13–22, 2024.
Y. Lipman, R. T. Chen, H. Ben, et al., “Flow matching for generative modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.
P. Esser, S. Kulal, and A. Blattmann, “Scaling rectified flow
transformers for high-resolution image synthesis,” in ICML, 2024.
S. Martin, A. Gagneux, P. Hagemann, and G. Steidl, “Pnp-flow:
Plug-and-play image restoration with flow matching,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.02423, 2024.

IEEE TPAMI

[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[74]
[75]
[76]
[77]
[78]
[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]
[83]
[84]
[85]
[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]
[90]
[91]
[92]
[93]
[94]
[95]
[96]
[97]
[98]

C. Han, K. Murao, T. Noguchi, and Y. Kawata, “Learning more
with less: Conditional pggan-based data augmentation for brain
metastases detection,” in CIKM, pp. 119–127, 2019.
T. Karras, S. Laine, and M. Aittala, “Analyzing and improving
the image quality of stylegan,” in CVPR, pp. 110–119, 2020.
C. He, K. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Guo, and X. Li, “Strategic
preys make acute predators: Enhancing camouflaged object detectors by generating camouflaged objects,” in ICLR, 2024.
H. Chung, J. Kim, and Mccann, “Diffusion posterior sampling for
general noisy inverse problems,” arXiv arXiv:2209.14687, 2022.
O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, and H. Su, “Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vision, pp. 211–252, 2015.
G. Batzolis and J. Stanczuk, “Conditional image generation with
score-based diffusion models,” arXiv arXiv:2111.13606, 2021.
J. Choi and S. Kim, “Ilvr: Conditioning method for denoising
diffusion probabilistic models,” arXiv arXiv:2108.02938, 2021.
H. Chung, B. Sim, D. Ryu, and J. C. Ye, “Improving diffusion models for inverse problems using manifold constraints,”
NeurIPS, pp. 83–96, 2022.
A. Graikos, N. Malkin, N. Jojic, and D. Samaras, “Diffusion
models as plug-and-play priors,” NeurIPS, pp. 14715–14728, 2022.
B. Kawar, M. Elad, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion restoration models,” NeurIPS, pp. 23593–23606, 2022.
Y. Zhu, K. Zhang, and J. Liang, “Denoising diffusion models for
plug-and-play image restoration,” in CVPR, pp. 1219–1229, 2023.
Y. Wang and J. Yu, “Zero-shot image restoration using denoising
diffusion model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00490, 2022.
M. Delbracio and P. Milanfar, “Inversion by direct iteration: An
alternative to denoising diffusion for image restoration,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.11435, 2023.
G.-H. Liu, A. Vahdat, and D.-A. Huang, “I2sb: Image-to-image
schrodinger bridge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05872, 2023.
H. Chung, J. Kim, and J. C. Ye, “Direct diffusion bridge
using data consistency for inverse problems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.19809, 2023.
K. Pandey, A. Mukherjee, P. Rai, and A. Kumar, “Diffusevae:
Efficient, controllable and high-fidelity generation from lowdimensional latents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00308, 2022.
Z. Fabian, B. Tinaz, and M. Soltanolkotabi, “Diracdiffusion:
Denoising and incremental reconstruction with assured dataconsistency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14353, 2023.
H. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Chang, “Srdiff: Single image superresolution with diffusion models,” Neurocom., pp. 47–59, 2022.
J. Ho, C. Saha, and W. Chan, “Cascaded diffusion models for high
fidelity image generation,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., pp. 249–281, 2022.
Z. Yue, J. Wang, and C. C. Loy, “Resshift: Efficient diffusion model
for image super-resolution by residual shifting,” NeurIPS, vol. 36,
2024.
Y. Wang, W. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Guo, L.-P. Chau, et al.,
“Sinsr: diffusion-based image super-resolution in a single step,”
in CVPR, pp. 25796–25805, 2024.
Z. Luo, F. Gusta, et al., “Image restoration with mean-reverting
stochastic differential equations,” arXiv:2301.11699, 2023.
A. Niu, K. Zhang, and T. X. Pham, “Conditional diffusion probabilistic models for single image super-resolution,” in ICIP, 2023.
X. Lin, J. He, and Z. Chen, “Diffbir: Towards blind image restoration with generative diffusion prior,” arXiv:2308.15070, 2023.
H. Sun, W. Li, J. Liu, H. Chen, R. Pei, X. Zou, Y. Yan, and
Y. Yang, “Coser: Bridging image and language for cognitive
super-resolution,” in CVPR, pp. 25868–25878, 2024.
A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural language
supervision,” in ICML, pp. 8748–8763, 2021.
E. Gebre, K. Saxena, T. Tran, et al., “A diffusion-based image
inpainting pipeline,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16016, 2024.
C. Zhang, W. Yang, et al., “Multi-modality guided image inpainting based on diffusion models,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, 2024.
J. Whang, M. Delbracio, H. Talebi, and C. Saharia, “Deblurring
via stochastic refinement,” in CVPR, pp. 293–303, 2022.
W. Li, X. Yu, and K. Zhou, “Sdm: Spatial diffusion model for large
hole image inpainting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02963, 2022.
C. Saharia, W. Chan, H. Chang, and C. Lee, “Palette: Image-toimage diffusion models,” in SIGGRAPH, pp. 1–10, 2022.
X. Ju, X. Liu, X. Wang, et al., “A plug-and-play image inpainting
model with decomposed diffusion,” arXiv:2403.06976, 2024.
A. Grechka, G. Couairon, et al., “Gradient-guided inpainting with
diffusion models,” Comput. Vis. Image Underst., 2024.

18

[99]

Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, and D. Liu, “Hierarchical integration diffusion
model for realistic image deblurring,” NeurIPS, 2023.
[100] C. Laroche, A. Almansa, and E. Coupete, “Fast diffusion em: a
diffusion model for blind inverse problems with application to
deconvolution,” in WACV, pp. 5271–5281, 2024.
[101] R. Spetlik, D. Rozumnyi, and J. Matas, “Single-image deblurring,
trajectory and shape recovery of fast moving objects with denoising diffusion models,” in WACV, pp. 6857–6866, 2024.
[102] P. Wang, J. He, Q. Yan, et al., “Diffevent: Event residual diffusion
for image deblurring,” in ICASSP, pp. 3450–3454, IEEE, 2024.
[103] Y. Jin, X. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, and M. Zhang, “Raindrop clarity:
A dual-focused dataset for day and night raindrop removal,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1–17, Springer, 2024.
[104] J. Wang, S. Wu, Z. Yuan, et al., “Frequency compensated diffusion
model for real-scene dehazing,” Neural Networks, p. 106281, 2024.
[105] Y. Zhu and L. Wang, “Diffusion model based low-light enhancement for space satellite,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14227, 2023.
[106] G. Wu and C. Jin, “Difflie: Low-light image enhancment based
on deep diffusion model,” in ISCTIS, pp. 522–526, IEEE, 2023.
[107] H. Jiang, A. Luo, and H. Fan, “Low-light image enhancement
with wavelet-based diffusion models,” ACM TOG, pp. 1–14, 2023.
[108] Y. Wang, Y. Yu, W. Yang, and L. Guo, “Learning to expose for
low-light image enhancement,” in ICCV, pp. 12438–12448, 2023.
[109] J. Hou, Z. Zhu, and J. Hou, “Global structure-aware diffusion
process for low-light image enhancement,” NeurIPS, 2024.
[110] X. Yi, H. Xu, and J. Ma, “Diff-retinex: Rethinking low-light image
enhancement with a generative diffusion model,” in ICCV, 2023.
[111] Y. Yin and D. Xu, “Cle diffusion: Controllable light enhancement
diffusion model,” in ACM MM, pp. 145–156, 2023.
[112] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, and
L. Gustafson, “Segment anything,” in ICCV, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
[113] M. Xue, J. He, and Y. He, “Low-light image enhancement via
clip-fourier guided wavelet diffusion,” arXiv:2401.03788, 2024.
[114] J. Yue, L. Fang, S. Xia, Y. Deng, and J. Ma, “Dif-fusion: Towards
high color fidelity in infrared and visible image fusion with
diffusion models,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., 2023.
[115] H. Guo, M. Chen, K. Li, H. Su, and P. Lv, “Glad: A globalattention-based diffusion model for infrared and visible image
fusion,” in ICIC, pp. 345–356, Springer, 2024.
[116] M. Li, R. Pei, T. Zheng, et al., “Multi-focus image fusion using
denoising diffusion models,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238, 2024.
[117] Z. Zhao, H. Bai, Y. Zhu, and J. Zhang, “Denoising diffusion model
for multi-modality image fusion,” in ICCV, pp. 8082–8093, 2023.
[118] X. Yi, L. Tang, H. Zhang, H. Xu, and J. Ma, “Diff-if: Multimodality image fusion via diffusion model with fusion knowledge prior,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 110, p. 102450, 2024.
[119] Z. Cao, S. Cao, and X. Wu, “Denoising diffusion model for remote
sensing image fusion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04774, 2023.
[120] B. Yang, Z. Jiang, D. Pan, H. Yu, G. Gui, and W. Gui, “Lfdt-fusion:
A latent feature-guided diffusion transformer model for general
image fusion,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 113, p. 102639, 2025.
[121] S. Kumari and P. Singh, “Data efficient deep learning for medical
image analysis: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06557, 2023.
[122] H. Chung and J. C. Ye, “Score-based diffusion models for accelerated mri,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 80, p. 102479, 2022.
[123] B. Ozturkler, C. Liu, B. Eckart, M. Mardani, J. Song, and J. Kautz,
“Smrd: Sure-based robust mri reconstruction with diffusion models,” in MICCAI, pp. 199–209, Springer, 2023.
[124] A. Güngör, S. U. Dar, Ş. Öztürk, Y. Korkmaz, H. A. Bedel, et al.,
“Adaptive diffusion priors for accelerated mri reconstruction,”
Med. Image Anal., vol. 88, p. 102872, 2023.
[125] C. Peng, P. Guo, S. K. Zhou, et al., “Towards performant and
reliable undersampled mr reconstruction via diffusion model
sampling,” in MICCAI, pp. 623–633, Springer, 2022.
[126] Y. Korkmaz, T. Cukur, and V. M. Patel, “Self-supervised mri
reconstruction with unrolled diffusion models,” in MICCAI,
pp. 491–501, Springer, 2023.
[127] A. C. Kak and M. Slaney, Principles of computerized tomographic
imaging. SIAM, 2001.
[128] G. Xu, C. He, H. Wang, H. Zhu, and W. Ding, “Dm-fusion: Deep
model-driven network for heterogeneous image fusion,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., 2023.
[129] Y. Peng, M. Li, and J. Grandi, “Top-level design and simulated
performance of first portable ct-mr scanner,” IEEE Access, 2022.
[130] M. Ju, C. He, and J. Liu, “Ivf-net: An infrared and visible data
fusion deep network for traffic object enhancement in intelligent
transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2022.

IEEE TPAMI

[131] Q. Lyu and G. Wang, “Conversion between ct and mri images
using diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12104, 2022.
[132] X. Meng, Y. Gu, and Y. Pan, “A novel unified conditional scorebased generative framework for multi-modal medical image
completion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.03430, 2022.
[133] Y. Li, H. Shao, and X. Liang, “Zero-shot medical image translation
via frequency-guided diffusion models,” arXiv:2304.02742, 2023.
[134] K. Gong and K. Johnson, “Pet image denoising based on denoising diffusion model,” Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Imaging, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[135] D. Hu, Y. K. Tao, and I. Oguz, “Unsupervised denoising of retinal
oct with diffusion model,” in Medical Imaging, SPIE, 2022.
[136] C. Wu, D. Wang, Y. Bai, and H. Mao, “Hyperspectral image superresolution via conditional diffusion models,” in ICCV, 2023.
[137] S. Shi, L. Zhang, and J. Chen, “Hyperspectral and multispectral
image fusion using the conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03423, 2023.
[138] J. Liu, Z. Yuan, and Z. Pan, “Diffusion model with detail complement for remote sensing super-resolution,” Remote Sens., 2022.
[139] M. V. Perera and N. G. Nair, “Sar despeckling using a denoising
diffusion model,” IEEE Geosci. Remote. Sens. Lett., 2023.
[140] S. Xiao, L. Huang, and S. Zhang, “Unsupervised sar despeckling
based on diffusion model,” in IGASS, pp. 810–813, IEEE, 2023.
[141] X. Zhao and K. Jia, “Cloud removal in remote sensing using
sequential-based diffusion models,” Remote Sens., p. 2861, 2023.
[142] N. B. Badhe, V. A. Bharadi, N. Giri, and S. Tolye, “Implementation
of diffusion model for cloud removal in satellite imagery,”
[143] M. Seo and Y. Oh, “Improved flood insights: Diffusion-based sar
to eo image translation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07123, 2023.
[144] A. Sebaq and M. ElHelw, “Remote sensing image generation from
text using diffusion model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02455, 2023.
[145] C. Saharia and W. Chan, “Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion
models with deep language understanding,” NeurIPS, 2022.
[146] Y. Huang and S. Xiong, “Remote sensing dehazing using regionbased diffusion models,” IEEE Geosci. Remote. Sens. Lett., 2023.
[147] R. Coifman and D. Donoho, Translation-invariant denoising. 1995.
[148] L. Zhang, X. Luo, and S. Li, “R2h-ccd: Hyperspectral imagery
generation from rgb images based on conditional cascade diffusion probabilistic models,” in IGASS, pp. 7392–7395, 2023.
[149] K. Deng and Z. Jiang, “A noise-model-free hyperspectral image
denoising method based on diffusion model,” in IGASS, 2023.
[150] Y. Miao, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and D. Tao, “Dds2m: Selfsupervised denoising diffusion spatio-spectral model for hyperspectral image restoration,” in ICCV, pp. 12086–12096, 2023.
[151] A. Tuel and T. Kerdreux, “Diffusion models for interferometric
satellite aperture radar,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16847, 2023.
[152] X. Rui, X. Cao, L. Pang, Z. Zhu, Z. Yue, and D. Meng, “Unsupervised hyperspectral pansharpening via low-rank diffusion
model,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 107, p. 102325, 2024.
[153] J.-B. Huang and A. Singh, “Single image super-resolution from
transformed self-exemplars,” in CVPR, pp. 5197–5206, 2015.
[154] P. Wei, Z. Xie, and H. Lu, “Component divide-and-conquer for
real-world image super-resolution,” in ECCV, pp. 101–117, 2020.
[155] Z. Shen, W. Wang, X. Lu, J. Shen, H. Ling, T. Xu, and L. Shao,
“Human-aware motion deblurring,” in ICCV, pp. 72–81, 2019.
[156] J. Rim and H. Lee, “Real-world blur dataset for learning and
benchmark deblurring algorithms,” in ECCV, pp. 184–201, 2020.
[157] B. Li, W. Ren, and D. Fu, “Benchmarking single-image dehazing
and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., pp. 492–505, 2018.
[158] C. Ancuti and C. Ancuti, “An image dehazing benchmark with
non-homogeneous hazy images,” in CVPRW, pp. 444–445, 2020.
[159] Y. Liu and L. Zhu, “From synthetic to real: Image dehazing
collaborating with real data,” in ACM MM, pp. 50–58, 2021.
[160] W. Yang and R. T. Tan, “Deep joint rain detection and removal
from a single image,” in CVPR, pp. 1357–1366, 2017.
[161] R. Qian and R. Tan, “Attentive generative network for raindrop
removal from a single image,” in CVPR, pp. 482–491, 2018.
[162] Y. Ba, H. Zhang, and E. Yang, “Not just streaks: Towards ground
truth for single image deraining,” in ECCV, pp. 723–740, 2022.
[163] C. Wei, W. Wang, and W. Yang, “Deep retinex decomposition for
low-light enhancement,” BMVC, 2018.
[164] W. Yang and W. Wang, “Sparse gradient regularized deep retinex
network,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 72–86, 2021.
[165] H. Xu, J. Ma, J. Jiang, X. Guo, and H. Ling, “U2fusion: A unified
unsupervised image fusion network,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., 2020.

19

[166] L. Tang, J. Yuan, H. Zhang, X. Jiang, and J. Ma, “Piafusion: A
progressive infrared and visible image fusion network based on
illumination aware,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 83, pp. 79–92, 2022.
[167] J. Liu, X. Fan, Z. Huang, G. Wu, et al., “Target-aware dual adversarial learning and a multi-scenario benchmark to fuse infrared
and visible for object detection,” in CVPR, pp. 5802–5811, 2022.
[168] J. Zbontar, F. Knoll, A. Sriram, T. Murrell, Z. Huang, M. J. Muckley, A. Defazio, et al., “fastmri: An open dataset and benchmarks
for accelerated mri,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.08839, 2018.
[169] A. D. Desai, A. M. Schmidt, E. B. Rubin, et al., “Skm-tea: A dataset
for accelerated mri reconstruction with dense image labels for
quantitative clinical evaluation,” in NeurIPS, 2021.
[170] R. Zhao, B. Yaman, Y. Zhang, R. Stewart, et al., “fastmri+, clinical
pathology annotations for knee and brain fully sampled magnetic
resonance imaging data,” Sci. Data, p. 152, 2022.
[171] A. Blattmann, R. Rombach, and H. Ling, “High-resolution video
synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in CVPR, 2023.
[172] J. Ho, T. Salimans, A. A. Gritsenko, W. Chan, M. Norouzi, and
D. J. Fleet, “Video diffusion models,” in NeurIPS, 2022.
[173] J. Ho, W. Chan, and C. Saharia, “High definition video generation
with diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.
[174] Y. Wang, X. Chen, and X. Ma, “High-quality video generation
with cascaded latent diffusion models,” arXiv:2309.15103, 2023.
[175] S. Ge, S. Nah, and G. Liu, “Preserve your own correlation: A noise
prior for video diffusion models,” in ICCV, pp. 930–941, 2023.
[176] T. Höppe, A. Mehrjou, and S. Bauer, “Diffusion models for video
prediction and infilling,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2022.
[177] V. Voleti and C. Pal, “Masked conditional video diffusion for
prediction, generation, and interpolation,” in NeurIPS, 2022.
[178] D. Danier and F. Zhang, “Ldmvfi: Video frame interpolation with
latent diffusion models,” in AAAI, pp. 1472–1480, 2024.
[179] X. Yuan, J. Baek, K. Xu, et al., “Efficient temporal adaptation for
text-to-video super-resolution,” in WACV, pp. 489–496, 2024.
[180] Z. Chen, F. Long, Z. Qiu, et al., “Learning spatial adaptation and
temporal coherence in diffusion models,” arXiv:2403.17000, 2024.
[181] Y. Yang, H. Wu, et al., “Diffusion test-time adaptation for video
adverse weather removal,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07684, 2024.
[182] Z. Liu, P. Luo, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “Deep learning face
attributes in the wild,” in ICCV, pp. 3730–3738, 2015.
[183] L. Tang and C. He, “Consistency regularization for generalizable
source-free domain adaptation,” in ICCV, pp. 23–33, 2023.
[184] L. Tang, Z. Tian, K. Li, C. He, H. Zhou, H. Zhao, X. Li, and J. Jia,
“Mind the interference: Retaining pre-trained knowledge in parameter efficient continual learning of vision-language models,”
in ECCV, pp. 346–365, 2024.
[185] T. Karras and T. Aila, “Progressive growing of gans for improved
quality, stability, and variation,” arXiv:1710.10196, 2017.
[186] G. Qu, D. Zhang, and P. Yan, “Information measure for performance of image fusion,” Electron. lett., vol. 38, no. 7, p. 1, 2002.
[187] C. S. Xydeas, V. Petrovic, et al., “Objective image fusion performance measure,” Electron. lett., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 308–309, 2000.
[188] R. Zhang and P. Isola, “The unreasonable effectiveness of deep
features as a perceptual metric,” in CVPR, pp. 586–595, 2018.
[189] M. Heusel, H. Ram, and Unter, “Gans trained by a two time-scale
update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium,” NeurIPS, 2017.
[190] A. Niu, K. Zhang, and T. X. Pham, “Conditional diffusion models
for single image super-resolution,” in ICIP, pp. 615–619, 2023.
[191] S. Shang, Z. Shan, and G. Liu, “Combining cnn and diffusion
model for image super-resolution,” in AAAI, pp. 8975–8983, 2024.
[192] G. Zhang, J. Ji, Y. Zhang, M. Yu, T. Jaakkola, and S. Chang,
“Towards coherent image inpainting using denoising diffusion
implicit models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03322, 2023.
[193] A. Liu, M. Niepert, and G. V. den Broeck, “Image inpainting via
tractable steering of diffusion models,” 2023.
[194] F. Xiao, S. Hu, Y. Shen, C. Fang, J. Huang, C. He, L. Tang,
Z. Yang, and X. Li, “A survey of camouflaged object detection
and beyond,” CAAI AIR, 2024.
[195] C. Meng, R. Rombach, and R. Gao, “On distillation of guided
diffusion models,” in CVPR, pp. 14297–14306, 2023.
[196] H. Liu, J. Xing, and M. Xie, “Improved diffusion-based image
colorization via piggybacked models,” arXiv:2304.11105, 2023.
[197] S. Abu-Hussein, T. Tirer, and R. Giryes, “Adir: Adaptive diffusion
for image reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03221, 2022.
[198] Z. Shi, H. Zheng, C. Xu, C. Dong, et al., “Resfusion: Denoising
diffusion probabilistic models for image restoration based on
prior residual noise,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14900, 2023.

IEEE TPAMI

[199] H. Chung, B. Sim, and J. C. Ye, “Come-closer-diffuse-faster:
Accelerating conditional diffusion models for inverse problems
through stochastic contraction,” in CVPR, pp. 12413–12422, 2022.
[200] K. Zhao and L. Y. Hung, “Partdiff: Image super-resolution with
partial diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11926, 2023.
[201] D. Zhang, S. Li, and C. Chen, “Layer pruning and normalized
distillation for diffusion models,” arXiv:2404.11098, 2024.
[202] T. Castells, H. Song, T. Piao, and S. Choi, “Edgefusion: On-device
text-to-image generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11925, 2024.
[203] Y. Jin, W. Ye, W. Yang, Y. Yuan, and R. T. Tan, “Des3: Adaptive
attention-driven self and soft shadow removal using vit similarity,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 38, pp. 2634–2642, 2024.
[204] L. Tang, K. Li, C. He, Y. Zhang, and X. Li, “Source-free domain
adaptive fundus image segmentation with class-balanced mean
teacher,” in MICCAI, pp. 684–694, 2023.
[205] R. Liu, J. Gao, and J. Zhang, “Investigating bi-level optimization
for learning and vision from a unified perspective: A survey,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., pp. 10045–10067, 2021.
[206] S. Sun, W. Ren, T. Wang, and X. Cao, “Rethinking image restoration for object detection,” NeurIPS, pp. 4461–4474, 2022.
[207] C. Fang, C. He, F. Xiao, Y. Zhang, L. Tang, Y. Zhang, K. Li, and
X. Li, “Real-world image dehazing with coherence-based label
generator and cooperative unfolding network,” NeurIPS, 2024.
[208] J. Wang, S. Song, J. Su, and S. K. Zhou, “Distortion-disentangled
contrastive learning,” in WACV, pp. 75–85, 2024.
[209] Z. Yue and C. C. Loy, “Difface: Blind face restoration with
diffused error contraction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06512, 2022.
[210] Z. Wang and Z. Zhang, “Dr2: Diffusion-based robust degradation
remover for blind face restoration,” in CVPR, pp. 64–73, 2023.
[211] L. V. Wang and S. Hu, “Photoacoustic tomography: in vivo
imaging from organelles to organs,” science, vol. 335, no. 6075,
pp. 1458–1462, 2012.
[212] X. Zeng, A. Kahng, L. Xue, J. Mahamid, Y.-W. Chang, and M. Xu,
“High-throughput cryo-et structural pattern mining by unsupervised deep iterative subtomogram clustering,” PNAS, 2023.
[213] Z. Liang and C. Li, “Iterative prompt learning for unsupervised
backlit image enhancement,” in ICCV, pp. 8094–8103, 2023.
[214] C. He, R. Zhang, F. Xiao, C. Fang, L. Tang, Y. Zhang, L. Kong, D.-P.
Fan, K. Li, and S. Farsiu, “Run: Reversible unfolding network for
concealed object segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18783,
2025.
[215] Z. Luo, F. K. Gustafsson, Z. Zhao, et al., “Controlling visionlanguage models for universal image restoration,” in ICLR, 2024.
[216] Z. Li, Y. Lei, C. Ma, et al., “Prompt-in-prompt learning for universal image restoration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.05038, 2023.
[217] D. Zheng, X. Wu, et al., “Selective hourglass mapping for universal image restoration based on diffusion model,” in CVPR, 2024.
[218] J. Liu, Q. Wang, H. Fan, Y. Wang, Y. Tang, and L. Qu, “Residual
denoising diffusion models,” in CVPR, 2024.
[219] Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang, T. Xue, and J. Gu, “Autodir: Automatic allin-one image restoration with latent diffusion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.10123, 2023.
[220] Y. Ai, H. Huang, X. Zhou, et al., “Multimodal prompt perceiver:
Empower adaptiveness generalizability and fidelity for all-in-one
image restoration,” in CVPR, pp. 25432–25444, 2024.
[221] Z. Xie, C. Wu, et al., “Mini-omni2: Towards open-source gpt4o model with vision, speech and duplex,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.11190, 2024.
[222] J. Duan, S. Yu, H. L. Tan, H. Zhu, and C. Tan, “A survey of
embodied ai: From simulators to research tasks,” IEEE Trans.
Emerging Top. Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 230–244, 2022.
[223] T. Wang, X. Mao, C. Zhu, R. Xu, R. Lyu, et al., “Embodiedscan: A
holistic multi-modal 3d perception suite towards embodied ai,”
in CVPR, pp. 19757–19767, 2024.
[224] A. Gupta, S. Savarese, S. Ganguli, and L. Fei-Fei, “Embodied
intelligence via learning and evolution,” Nat. Commun., vol. 12,
no. 1, p. 5721, 2021.

20

Chunming He received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing,
China, in 2021, and the M.E. degree in computer science from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China, in 2024. He is currently a Ph.D. student
with the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Duke University, Durham, USA. His research interests include computer vision, image processing, and biomedical image analysis.

Yuqi Shen received the B.S. degree in aircraft control and information engineering with
the School of Astronautics, Beihang University,
Beijing, China in 2024. Now, he is pursuing his
M.S. degree in artificial intelligence, Tsinghua
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University. His research interests include
machine learning and computer vision.

Chengyu Fang received the B.S. degree in
software engineering from Southwest University, Chongqing, China in 2024. Now, he is
pursuing his M.S. degree in artificial intelligence, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University. His research
interests include computer vision and image processing.

Fengyang Xiao received the B.S. degree in information and computational science from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunicationa, Jiangsu Nanjing, China in 2021. Now, she
is pursuing her M.S. degree in mathematics,
School of Mathematics (Zhuhai), Sun Yat-sen
University. She will be a Ph.D. student with the
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, USA. Her research interests
include differential equations and numerical solutions, image processing and computer vision.

Longxiang Tang is currently a master’s student
at Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University. Before it, he received his B.S. degree in software engineering
from University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. His research interests include
multi-modal large language model and representation learning.

Yulun Zhang received a B.E. degree from the
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China, in 2013, an M.E. degree from the
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
China, in 2017, and a Ph.D. degree from the
Department of ECE, Northeastern University,
USA, in 2021. He is an associate professor at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
He was a postdoctoral researcher at Computer
Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. His research interests include image/video restoration
and synthesis, biomedical image analysis, model compression, multimodal computing, large language model. He is/was an Area Chair for
CVPR, ICCV, ECCV, NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, IJCAI, ACM MM, and a
Senior Program Committee (SPC) member for IJCAI and AAAI.

IEEE TPAMI

21

Wangmeng Zuo (M’09, SM’14) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer application technology
from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China,
in 2007. He is currently a Professor with the
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology. He has published
over 90 papers in top-tier academic journals and
conferences. His current research interests include image enhancement and restoration, image generation and editing, visual tracking, object detection, and image classification. He has
served as a Tutorial Organizer in ECCV 2016, an Associate Editor of the
IET Biometrics, The Visual Computers, Journal of Electronic Imaging,
and the Guest Editor of Neurocomputing, Pattern Recognition, IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, and IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems.

Zhenhua Guo received the Ph.D. degree in
computer science from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, in 2010. He was
a Visiting Scholar of electrical and computer engineering (ECE) with Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, from 2018 to 2019.
Since September 2022, he has been working
with the Tianyijiaotong Technology Ltd., China.
His research interests include computer vision,
deep learning and object detection.

Xiu Li received the Ph.D. degree in computer
integrated manufacturing from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 2000.
She was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. From 2003 to 2010, she was an
Associate Professor with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Since 2016, She has been a Full Professor at
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University. Her research interests include
computer vision and pattern recognition.

