This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

1

Detection of Motorcycles in Urban Traffic Using
Video Analysis: A Review
Jorge E. Espinosa , Sergio A. Velastín , Senior Member, IEEE, and John W. Branch
Abstract— Motorcycles are Vulnerable Road Users (VRU) and
as such, in addition to bicycles and pedestrians, they are the traffic actors most affected by accidents in urban areas. Automatic
video processing for urban surveillance cameras has the potential
to effectively detect and track these road users. The present
review focuses on algorithms used for detection and tracking
of motorcycles, using the surveillance infrastructure provided by
CCTV cameras. Given the importance of results achieved by
Deep Learning theory in the field of computer vision, the use
of such techniques for detection and tracking of motorcycles is
also reviewed. The paper ends by describing the performance
measures generally used, publicly available datasets (introducing
the Urban Motorbike Dataset (UMD) with quantitative evaluation
results for different detectors), discussing the challenges ahead
and presenting a set of conclusions with proposed future work
in this evolving area.
Index Terms— Vulnerable road users (VRU), motorcycle detection, vehicle detection, tracking, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), deep learning, computer vision.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE concentration of the world’s population in cities is
increasing year by year. It is calculated that 53% of the
population currently lives in urban areas and by 2050 this
number will grow to 67%. Nowadays, 64% of people travel
within urban environments and is expected that by 2050 the
amount of kilometers traveled will increase by 300% [1].
Emerging countries face the additional challenge of highly
populated urban areas with inadequate and insufficient urban

Manuscript received January 26, 2018; revised September 25, 2018, February 26, 2019, July 29, 2019, and October 4, 2019; accepted May 8, 2020.
This work was supported in part by the Departamento Administrativo de
Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación (COLCIENCIAS) Project: Reduccion de
Emisiones Vehiculares Mediante el Modelado y Gestion Optima de Trafico
en Areas Metropolitanas, Caso Medellín, Area Metropolitana del Valle de
Aburra, under Grant 111874558167 and Grant CT 049-2017, in part by
the Universidad Nacional de Colombia under Project HERMES 25374, and
in part by NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of GPUs. The work of
Sergio A. Velastín was supported in part by the Universidad Carlos III
de Madrid, in part by the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme for Research, Technological Development and Demonstration under
Grant 600371, in part by the El Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad
under Grant COFUND2013-51509, and in part by the Banco Santander.
The Associate Editor for this article was C. Guo. (Corresponding author:
Sergio A. Velastín.)
Jorge E. Espinosa is with Politécnico Colombiano Jaime Isaza
Cadavid, Facultad de Ingeniería, Medellín 050022, Colombia (e-mail:
jeespinosa@elpoli.edu.co).
Sergio A. Velastín is with Zebra Technologies Corporation, London SE1
9LQ, U.K., also with the School of Electronic Engineering and Computer
Science, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, U.K., and also
with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University Carlos
III de Madrid, 28270 Madrid, Spain (e-mail: sergio.velastin@ieee.org).
John W. Branch is with the Facultad de Minas, Universidad Nacional
de Colombia at Sede Medellín, Medellín 050034, Colombia (e-mail:
jwbranch@unal.edu.co).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2020.2997084

Fig. 1.

Motorcycles as part of traffic jams. Photograph taken from [4].

infrastructure. For this reason, their mobility strategies include
efforts to stimulate eco-friendlier modes such as public transport, walking, cycling, etc. However, people’s limited financial
resources and the relative ease to obtain driving licenses,
e.g. for motorcycles smaller than 200 c.c., have resulted
in a significant increase in this kind of vehicle (Figure 1).
Furthermore, there have been adverse consequences in public
health, particularly in Latin-America, where fatal casualties
involving motorcycles account for 45% of (all) traffic accidents [2] and a significant impact on the environment due to
the particle emission of this type of vehicle (P.M. 2.5). There
are reports [3] for other emerging regions in the world, such
as the Middle East, where they indicate that 63% of traffic
accidents involve VRUs, of which 32% corresponds just to
motorcyclists.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
in 2018 the proportion of VRUs involved in fatalities in traffic
accidents represented more than 54% [5] of all road users.
“Vulnerable road user” is a term coined to refer to traffic actors
more exposed to risk. Pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists
are accordingly considered “vulnerable since they benefit from
little or no external protective devices that would absorb
energy in a collision” [6].
Therefore, it is important to investigate and evaluate techniques or strategies that allow detecting and tracking pedestrians, bicyclists and motorcycles to reduce accidents, optimizing
and improving urban traffic management. “Of all the entities
in the class of vulnerable road users (VRUs), pedestrians,
bicyclists and motorcyclists are the most likely to suffer severe
injuries and death if they are involved in a collision with an
automobile” [7]. The use of Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS), and video analysis in particular, could be one way of

1524-9050 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

classification and tracking are more critical for traffic control
centers. Thus, when comparing algorithms, where possible we
comment on whether they account for clutter.
Finally, in recent years there have been new approaches
based on what are called deep learning methods that therefore deserve a special attention. The most applied technique
for detection is known as Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN), so detection of motorcycles using CNNs is especially
considered. The final section considers the main challenges
that motorcyclist detection faces, listing some of the public
datasets available for this type of research and the performance
measures used to evaluate algorithms. A new dataset focusing
on motorcycles is introduced, presenting baseline results. The
paper ends by pointing out some topics that are still open for
further research in this field.
II. H YPOTHESIS G ENERATION

Fig. 2.
tracking.

Traditional sequence of activities used for VRU detection and

dealing with the issues affecting motorcycles in the urban
context, specially in emerging countries, where motorcycles
constitute an important means of transport.
This review is specially oriented to the detection and
tracking of motorcycles since vision-based pedestrian detection has been extensively investigated during recent years,
e.g. [8] for ADAS (Advanced Driver Assistance Systems) and
[9], [10]. There is also a complete benchmark for vision-based
cyclist detection developed by Li et al. in [11]. On the other
hand, very limited work has been undertaken on motorcycles,
even though approaches might share similar techniques as for
pedestrians and cyclists.
Because most researchers working on VRUs tend to follow
a somewhat well-established pipeline of processes common in
object detection, classification and tracking, this review will
consider relevant work in the main sub-areas of such pipeline
(Figure 2).:
• Detection:
referred
here
to
as
Hypothesis Generation (HG),
encompassing
three
main aspects:
– Feature extraction
– Segmentation
– Localization.
• Classification or hypothesis verification (HV).
• Tracking.
It is also important to evaluate the performance of the studied algorithms especially under occlusion conditions frequent
in congested urban traffic conditions and where detection,

Hypothesis Generation (HG) for motorcycle detections
approaches can be divided into two categories:
appearance-based (e.g. using shape, color and texture
methods) and motion-based that use dynamic, spatio-temporal
characteristics methods. While appearance-based methods
tend identify the object directly from single images,
motion-based methods requires a sequence of images (video)
to extract the dynamic and static characteristics and to
determine the possible objects present in the scene. In the
context of vehicle detection, both methods try to separate
road users from the background. As described later, deep
learning methods can overcome the dependency on manually
choosing what particular image features to use.
A. Methods Based on Appearance
Appearance-based approaches detect motorcycles directly
from the image, detecting parts of the object to be classified and used to identify an object. Appearance features
are obtained from visual information extracted from objects
including color, texture or shape. Using these features it is
possible to detect vehicles even if remain static as in a traffic
jam.
1) Explicit Shape Approaches: As a first approximation
based on shape features, the spatial relationships between parts
of objects detected is modelled by explicit shape approaches.
For instance, the Circular Hough Transform (CHT) is used so
that the edge points of the potential objects (tires, helmets)
are grouped into object candidates by a voting procedure over
a set of parameterized image objects. This technique is used
by Silva et al. [12], [12] for helmet detection in motorcycles,
useful for ROI (Region of Interest) localization. This strategy
is also used for helmet and headlight detection by Mukhtar
and Tang [13]. Nevertheless the method is prone to errors
since it generates many false positives in congested scenarios
and detection fails for affine or projective transformations.
2) Texture Features: Feature extraction and description
advances go from basic image features (e.g. edge and
symmetry) to more general and most robust features that are
invariant to illumination, object size, rotation and affine transformations changes. Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT)
is a feature descriptor that produces local features which are
invariant to image scaling, rotation and translation and that

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ESPINOSA et al.: DETECTION OF MOTORCYCLES IN URBAN TRAFFIC USING VIDEO ANALYSIS

are partially invariant to affine projections and illumination
changes [14]. These features identify the presence of salient
points, which are robust to many geometrical transformations
and even to illumination changes. In some approaches, SIFT
is modified as in DSIFT (Dense Scale Invariant Feature
Transform) [15], whose main property is that the features
are generated in a uniform way based on a dense mesh of
places where scale and orientation are fixed. The speeded up
robust features (SURF), is also inspired on the SIFT descriptor
but it focuses more on computational speed, using box filters
instead of Gaussian filters. Its feature descriptor is constructed
with the sum of the Haar wavelet response around the interest
point. However, none of these three feature extractors incorporate spatial relationships between key points. For this reason
Thai et al. [16] adopt a technique of pyramidal space kernel
for feature extraction [17], exploiting the spatial localization of
motorcycles in their training images. The method relies heavily
on images captured from a top view angle which constrains
the field of view of a typical surveillance camera.
The Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) extracts features
based on a combination of color and texture, which are
extracted by first applying edge operators over the image
and then discretizing and bucketing the orientations of the
edge intensities into a histogram achieving some spatial
and illumination invariance. Due to the high vulnerability of motorcyclists, many motorcycle detection approaches
also analyze the presence of helmets. The use of HOG
is quite common for this. A feature comparative analysis
is reported by Dahiya et al. [18] and Singh et al. [19],
comparing the performances of three different appearance
features obtained after foreground detection: HOG, SIFT and
LBP. HOG shows the best discrimination properties when
used both for motorcycling and helmet detection. The same
strategy is proposed by [20], but without reporting results.
Since such methods rely on foreground object detection, it is
no clear how they could deal with occluded or stationary
objects. The HOG descriptor combined with the Circular
Hough Transform (CHT) is also used for helmet detection
in [12], since geometric information obtained only from CHT
may be ambiguous w.r.t heads shapes. Recently, exploiting
the arc circularity detected in ROI areas with a combination
with HOG features, Talaulikar et al. [21] detect helmets
on motorcycle riders, applying Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for performance and accuracy improvements, but
they provide very little details on the statistical significance
of their results and the applicability to surveillance cameras given their reliance on background removal. Meanwhile
Bariş and Baştanlar [22] combine an omnidirectional and a
Pan-Tilt-Zoom (PTZ) camera in a hybrid camera system to
detect and track traffic scene objects including pedestrians,
motorcycles, cars and vans. Initial classification is done using
an omni-directional camera using shape-based features of
moving objects extracted by Adaptive Background Learning
(ABL) (see section II-B). This classification is improved
once the moving objects are detected and tracked using a
Kalman filter. Then, from PTZ camera images the object
HOG features are extracted and used to increase classification accuracy. The method is very sensitive to occlusions or

3

Fig. 3. Side view: The luminance of the region inside the wheels of a
bicycle is more similar to the background, with respect to the same region of
a motorcycle. Based on the parameters extracted, the two wheels are used as
criteria for classification (reprinted from [26], by permission from Elsevier).

overlapping objects, where the background subtraction method
may fail.
Computing the difference of the sum of pixels within
rectangles in a given image patch, Haar-like features allow
real-time performance and are used for motorcycle detection
to improve vehicle driving safety in [23] using it for helmet
detection in [24], [25]. Nevertheless, Haar-like features do not
correlate under different view angles, restricting their use in
surveillance scenarios.
3) Geometric Features & 3-D Models: Computer-generated
3-D models of motorcycles can be used for detection by
appearance matching. Messelodi et al. [26] extend detection
and classification of vehicles in urban intersections [27],
achieving discrimination between bicycles and motorcycles.
An object descriptor stores features to decide which view
is selected to analyze the image. Two different contexts are
identified based on the movement direction of the vehicle
with respect to the axis orthogonal to the ground plane. Small
angles describe front or rear view of the vehicle appearing in
the image. Otherwise, the image represents a lateral view of
the vehicle (Figure 3). In a front view, the wheel section will
determine a comparative criterion between the whole of the
object with respect to the thickness of the rim, distinguishing
between a bicycle and a motorcycle. Unfortunately, the algorithm is not evaluated under congested scenarios were occlusions could affect the feature extraction process. Meanwhile,
Buch et al. [28] use a 3-D wire model to discriminate urban
road users between bus/lorry, van, car/taxi, motorcycle/bicycle
and pedestrian. The approach does not take into account the
movement of the vehicles and does not deal with occlusions as
each computed silhouette is associated with a single vehicle.
4) Multiple Features: Due to the complexity of motorcycle
detection, some authors combine multiple features to solve
problems such as occlusion, background clutter and variations
in orientation and illumination. Silva et al. [12], [12] proposed a methodology for helmet use detection on highways
scenarios by determining which objects appear to be moving
using a calibration stage, extracting their features by SURF,
HAAR, HOG, Fourier and K-means description. Even with the
improved results reported by the authors, the use of multiple
integrated features demands a complex task of parameter
selection and tuning and applicability for urban scenarios is
not clear.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

5) Other Descriptors: There are other approaches to extract
motorcycle features described in the literature. Le and
Huynh [29] propose an integrated method for counting and
detecting motorcycles, extracting features with Gabor filters
and using random forest to generate a density map via an indirect counting method. Using interest point descriptors, Muzammel et al. [30] do hypothesis generation for a motorcycle
vision-based rear-end collision detection system using Harris
corners which are points uniformly sampled in a salience
detector. However, this procedure could be sensitive to what is
known as the “aperture problem”. Illumination variances can
be removed by edge detection and binary edges can provide
normalized input for feature descriptors. So, the Sobel operator
has been used [31] to design collision avoidance systems,
detecting the rear view of motorcycles, by defining initial
hypotheses of possible objects from shadows, wheels and vertical edges [32] and using template matching [33]. However,
these approaches are not suitable for CCTV surveillance cameras due to a restricted distance and view angle (motorcycle
rear view). Duan et al. [32] monitored the back of vehicles
and motorcycles supported by a Lane Change Assistant (LCA).
A multi-resolution technique is presented to achieve real-time
performance, using an Integrated Memory Array Processor
(IMAP). For HG, the method involves obstacle detection
using optical flow and prior knowledge using data from the
detection of previous vehicles during the day that includes
symmetry, color, shadows, geometric characteristics (corners,
horizontal and vertical edges) and texture. It is not clear how
prior data can be sufficiently representative for all possible
detections. Initial hypotheses of possible objects are obtained
from shadows, wheels and vertical edges. As shadows are
usually affected by illumination, the ROI position is adjusted
based on grayscale symmetry. The main issue with the method
is related to dealing with congested scenes with three or more
objects overlapping, or reduced light conditions.
B. Methods Based on Motion
Using spatio-temporal information for detection is popular, because vehicle motion can be used for traffic counts,
infringements, etc. Motion detection aims to separate moving
foreground objects from the static background. Generally
when the background is modeled with information of the
scene, then moving objects are detected by comparing the
current frame with the background model. Due to dynamics,
speed and maneuverability of motorcycles, most of the works
rely on methods based on motion features using background
subtraction, nevertheless further analysis is required to discriminate precisely this vehicle type. Furthermore, working
under congestion and semi-static traffic makes it difficult to
obtain good background models.
1) Simple Background Subtraction: The Background model
is initially defined (or learned) with no movement objects (traffic) as a reference scene. Each frame is subtracted from
the background model applying a threshold for the resulting
difference, generating a foreground mask. Such threshold
can be dynamic or constant, global or local. This approach
is used by Kanhere et al. [34] for motorcycle detection,
starting with a manual “six clicks” camera calibration, defining

three lines parallel to the image projection, then applying
background subtraction to identify blobs of moving objects.
Finally, features are identified using the estimated height
and the local slope (in real world coordinates) projected
from foreground blobs and grouped by region growth. These
features correspond to typical vehicle dimensions that depend
on camera calibration. It is not clear if these features can be
identified robustly under heavy traffic congestion. Meanwhile,
the work of Chiu et al. [35] is extended by Ku et al. [36],
where hypothesis generation of motorcycle detections starts
from background subtraction, dealing with possible overlaps
with other vehicles and proposing an additional segmentation
method to detect and separate motorcycles in the scene. The
methods rely on helmet detection to drive search methods.
Nevertheless, when people do not wear helmets it makes them
more vulnerable, so it is even more important to detect them.
To deal with this situation, Chiverton [37] shows a method
for detecting motorcycle riders who do not wear helmets. The
method is based on background subtraction and component
labeling, along with operations to reduce noise and to add
pixels to detected regions. Once a motorcycle is detected,
a search process is employed to find the rider’s head. However,
it is not clear if they can deal with overlapping objects (traffic
congestion) and not detected as a single blob. Background
subtraction is also used by Sekar et al. [38] for motorcycle
features extraction later used for helmet detection.
2) Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM): [39] is the most used
technique for foreground extraction. It consists on temporally
modelling each pixel of the image as a mixture of two or
more Gaussians, updating the distributions according to the
temporal pixel changes. This has a high computational cost,
but it can deal up to some extent with illumination changes
and frequent clutter. Waranusast et al. [40] detects moving
objects using GMM models and morphological closing on the
resulting binary images. To reduce computational burden, only
one instance of the frame sequence is captured in front of
the camera, this also allows determination of the direction
of the moving object. This technique works for fluid traffic
conditions, with no overlapping of vehicles where blob detection does not merge objects. Meanwhile, Dupuis et al. [41]
subtract background using a combination of GMM and a
shadow removal strategy. Then, the foreground blobs are
refined through Laplacian densities, dealing with different
types of shadows in the scene. Thereafter, simple features
such as area, width and height are employed for discriminating
motorcycles from other vehicles. Rashidan et al. [42] classify
common moving objects in street scenes as motorcycles,
pedestrians and cars. Moving objects are detected using GMM,
extracting foreground object features in terms of spatial and
temporal attributes. Spatial properties are based on a criterion
of “compactness” (ratio between area and square perimeter)
and height to width ratio. Temporal attributes are obtained
also from optical flow, working only with the central point of
the detected objects to reduce computational burden.
Traditional GMM has been improved to deal with shadow
detection and lighting changes. Chen et al. [43] propose a
vehicle (including motorcycles) detection and tracking system
from roadside CCTV in urban traffic. The Multi-Dimensional

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ESPINOSA et al.: DETECTION OF MOTORCYCLES IN URBAN TRAFFIC USING VIDEO ANALYSIS

Gaussian Kernel density Transform (MDGKT) has been used
in an attempt to deal with unwanted motions as well as
an extension of GMM called Self Adaptive GMM [44]
to continuously update the parameters of a GMM. It can
also detect object shadows based on the chromaticity value
of a moving pixel detected as a foreground. Nevertheless,
the method still has problems in detecting overlapping objects
moving at similar speeds. Meanwhile, Dahiya et al. [18] and
Singh et al. [19] report an approach for HG that relies on
adaptive background modelling based on GMM to separate
moving objects. The authors claim that a modified version
deals with different lighting conditions, but it is not clear
how to determine dynamic parameters such as the learning
rate, the lighting threshold or the number of Gaussians. In the
hybrid camera system of [22], the Adaptive Background
Learning (ABL) is used by an omni-directional camera and an
improved GMM (MOG) in a PTZ camera, to detect moving
objects. However, methods based on motion generally assume
that the videos are captured from a stationary camera and
therefore have issues with slow-moving/stopped traffic (traffic
jams), abrupt changes in illuminations, noise produced by
windy conditions or urban furniture as waving trees and,
of course, moving cameras.
III. H YPOTHESIS V ERIFICATION
Hypothesis verification (HV) is the process of classifying
the detected objects (into pre-determined classes such as
“pedestrian”, “bicycles”, “motorcycle”, etc.), normally using
a supervised learning approach. Obviously, the use of supervised learning generally involves procurement and labelling of
possibly large amounts of data.
Sometimes the problem is considered as a binary classification exercise between the object to identify and the
background. In other cases, the classes are defined explicitly
and the discrimination task is to determine which class a
detected object belongs to. Classifiers can be divided in two
categories, discriminative and generative classifiers. Discriminative classifiers are the most reported in literature and
they learn decision boundaries between classes (e.g. object
vs background). Generative classifiers, learn the underlying
class distribution detected and are less common for vehicle
detection. In what follows, different techniques are reported
applied to motorcycles.
A. Discriminative Classifiers
These include artificial neural networks (ANNs), support
vector machines (SVMs), boosting and conditional random
fields (CRFs) commonly treating motorcycle classification as a
binary classification problem, vehicle or non-vehicle, because
authors tend to focus on one of those vehicles.
1) Support Vector Machines (SVM): SVM carries out classification using linear decision hyperplanes in the feature space.
During training, the hyperplanes are calculated to maximize
the separation of the training data with different labels [45].
Vectors where the hyperplane lie are called support vectors.
The process can be analyzed as a quadratic optimization,
producing an absolute optimum. This technique has been
used for motorcycle classification, where SVMs (with linear

5

an non-linear kernels) have proved popular. Mukhtar and
Tang [13] use HOG features of motorcycles and background
to train a linear SVM. No overlapping motorcycles were analyzed. Sekar et al. [38] identify helmet presence by using SVM
as a classifier of the visual features extracted from the object.
Meanwhile, Duan et al. [32] report a binary SVM classification
by hierarchies, first between vehicles and not vehicles, then on
vehicle category, it tries to differentiate between motorcycles
and not motorcycles. The method has issues dealing with
occlusion and under special weather conditions as rain, clouds
and night time scenes. Using histograms obtained from head
regions (identified by their brightness characteristics due to
helmets) Chiverton [37] train a linear SVM. It is not clear
how the method deals with the detection of two occupants
in a single motorcycle, nor is it tested in congested scenarios.
Chen et al. [43] do vehicle detection by training an SVM classifier with synthetic data, with a feature vector of 202 elements
comprising measurement based features (MBF) and intensity
pyramid-based HOG (IPHOG). The method classifies different types of vehicles, including motorcycles, under different
illumination and weather conditions. Nevertheless the feature
definition requires high computational resources, which are
not evaluated on parallel or GPU architectures. An on-board
camera is studied by Shuo and Choi [23], who use SVM
as a classifier, but which fails to detect motorcycles due to
their ambiguous appearance w.r.t. pedestrians, using Haar-like
features as a feature extraction method. An SVM kernel
comparison is done by Dahiya et al. [18] and Singh et al. [19]
using sigmoid and radial basis function (RBF) and evaluating
three types of features (HOG, SIFT and LBP) to arrive at
the best hyper-plane results. This binary classification is performed for motorcycles and for helmet presence. Best results
were obtained using HOG as a feature with a linear kernel.
The main drawbacks are reliance on background subtraction
and lack of robustness against occlusions in congested traffic
scenes.
SVMs are also used in conjunction with 3D-Models: Messelodi et al. [26] use models of vehicles compared against a set
of 3-D definitions. They use 3-D classifiers which calculated
best correspondence with each 3-D model performing direct
comparisons. Otherwise, an SVM classifier models the difference between motorcycles and bicycles. Results are reported
using their own dataset, not publicly available.
SVMs are used used in the hybrid camera system of [22]
using HOG features and two binary SVMs, one to discriminate
car/van classes and another for motorcycles/pedestrian classes.
Best results are obtained from the previous results of the
omnidireccional camera classification, which are refined by the
SVM classifiers. Final results obtain an accuracy of 98.59%,
with only 71 motorcycles to classify.
The potential drawbacks of using an SVM as a classifier
are related to the ”curse of dimensionality” when there is a
kernel projection to a higher order making the learning process
slow.
2) Decision Trees: Decision trees are useful to model the
decision path which leads to vehicle classification. For motorcycle classification, in [41] all detected blobs are manually
labeled and fed to a decision tree (pruned to reduce overfitting)

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

obtaining the classification rules. However, these rules are
specific to a given camera resolution, lens focal length and
camera position.
3) Random Forest: is an ensemble learning method which
combines multiple decision trees during training time and
outputting the most frequently classified class of the individual trees. They are intended to correct the overfitting of
individual decision trees. Le and Huynh [29] use Random
Forest to generate a map of features, then an SVM is used to
classify the different parts of the motorcycle. They report high
accuracy mainly due to the use of a top-down camera view
point, avoiding occlusion between vehicles. Meanwhile [46]
uses a patch-based random forest of local experts, used to
generate a different object configuration later assembled for
final classification.
4) K-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN): Is a classifier that assigns a
label class to the input closest to the k training examples in the
feature space. The membership class assignment is based on a
simple voting mechanism. When k = 1, the class assignment
corresponds to the single nearest neighbor. k-NN is used
for motorcycles discrimination and helmet detection in [40].
The method creates features from the geometrical relationship
of motorcycles and helmets. The approach relies highly on
the quality of the background subtraction for motorcycle and
head detection which, as mentioned earlier, and it would have
difficulties under clutter or for semi-static or stopped vehicles.
k-NN is also used in the hybrid camera system of [22] for
the omni-directional camera, using k = 5 and obtaining a
100% of accuracy on a relatively small dataset with only
71 motorcycles.
5) Artificial Neural Networks (ANN’s): Inspired on the
synapses connection of neurons in the human brain, the model
consists on artificial neurons and signal connections. Each
connection transmits a signal from neuron to neuron which
inhibits or activates a possible response. The data transmitted
through the network allows the ANN structure to learn the
relationship or mapping between inputs and outputs, allowing
it to find patterns in the input data. Their use has been
reported for motorcycle classification even though their training features requires many parameters to tune and may not
converge to a local optimum. On the other hand, results
on Deep Learning architectures are raising the interest of
the research community (see section V). Sutikno et al. [47]
report a classification process of motorcyclists wearing or
not helmets, from images captured on the highway using
a backpropagation neural network. It is not clear how the
network architecture is defined. The training process uses
only 150 images previously segmented and it is unclear if
this is enough for generalization. It then uses just 30 images
restricted to the head area. No details are provided about the
stopping criteria for learning, nor on their object detection
process. Silva et al. [12], [12] report helmet detection, feeding
a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) using ROI definition and
circular Hough transform in combination with HOG. Images
where obtained from a highway scenario with no congestion
nor occlusion and under good weather and light conditions.

B. Other Approaches
Fuzzy logic approaches are also used in motorcycle classification. Rashidan et al. [42] use an Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy
Inference System (ANFIS) classifier, based on the first-order
Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) method, achieving improved
comparative results for motorcycles and cars. However,
the sequences used for comparative proposes contain at most
only 1034 frames, having only three motorcycles for detection.
Some work does not use classifiers e.g. [30] and [33] where
a bounding box is used for classification, which is constructed
based on width localization of the edge that corresponds to the
lower part and upper part of the vehicle. The bounding box size
and ratio corresponds to a constant parameter defined a priori.
Although the authors report work with different resolutions,
it is not clear why poor results are obtained with higher
resolution images. No clear performance results are presented
nor a description of the dataset used.
Matching techniques are used in conjunction with tracking
for motorcycle classification in cluttered scenarios in [34],
where classification starts once an object is tracked for five
consecutive frames. The foreground mask is compared by
means of a transformation matrix against real world parameters. To identify the vehicles, a correspondence and coincidence (matching) process is applied. The data used corresponds to more than 2000 vehicles, filmed during a rally in two
locations at Mertye Beach (South Carolina). It is not clear how
the measurement strategy based on camera calibration allows
distinguishing more than one or three vehicles detected as a
single blob by background subtraction.
IV. T RACKING
In its simplest definition, tracking can be understood as
estimating the trajectory of an object in the image plane as
it moves around a scene [48], [52] and it involves locating the
target in subsequent video frames after it has been recognized
and classified by the HV step. It is used to predict vehicle positions in subsequent frames, match vehicles between
adjacent frames and ultimately to obtain the trajectory and
location of each vehicle for each frame. Some techniques are
used to extract vehicles’ dynamic attributes, including velocity,
direction of movement and vehicle trajectories. Most vehicle
tracking algorithms follow one simple principle: vehicles in
two adjacent frames are the same if the spatial distance is
small.
According to Yilmaz et al. [52], object tracking can be
classified as point tracking, kernel based tracking and silhouette based tracking. Point trackers involve detection in
every frame, while geometric area or kernel based tracking
or contours-based tracking require detection only when the
object first appears in the scene. What follows are some of
the tracking techniques applied for motorcycles.
A. Kalman Filter Tracking
The Kalman Filter (KF) is a Point Tracker also known as
linear quadratic estimation. This algorithm uses a series of
measurements observed over time, containing noise and other
inaccuracies and produces estimates of unknown variables
that tend to be more precise than those based on a single

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ESPINOSA et al.: DETECTION OF MOTORCYCLES IN URBAN TRAFFIC USING VIDEO ANALYSIS

measurement alone. The KF can make full use of the historical
information and reduce the search range of the image, to significantly improve system processing speed. Its accuracy and
stability can suffer when vehicle motion and light conditions
change suddenly, in occlusion conditions or when linearity and
assumptions on target dynamics and noise are not satisfied.
Motorcycle tracking in [37] combines a KF for movement
estimation and a comparison of photometric data for correspondence analysis. To deal with occlusion and sporadic
errors, a “track propagation” strategy is proposed, but it is
not clear how this technique could manage multiple parallel
tracks or tracks that cross each other, something that can often
occur in cluttered scenes. In [43], tracking is done using a
Kalman filter, based on centroid location and velocity. For
each frame, a class label is computed and the final label for
the track is assigned with a voting scheme, considering the
entire track to make a decision. As it is only used for class
labelling, no specific tracking results are given. A KF is also
used in [41], for tracking detected blobs. Results are reported
on highways under various traffic and lighting conditions, but
these experiments use proprietary and unpublished data and
may fail under denser urban traffic conditions.
B. Kanade–Lucas–Tomasi (KLT) Feature Tracker
KLT is used for two wheelers classification in [53], based
on feature extraction from trajectories. Feature-based tracking
avoids tracking the moving objects as single bodies, but instead
traces distinct features (e.g. Harris corners [54]) of the moving
object. Since no descriptive physical features are used for
classification and tracking is based on speed, pedaling process
and acceleration profiles, the tracker misclassifies e-bikes due
to their higher speeds. Moreover, the method relies heavily on
a previous camera calibration and there is no comparison with
other classification or tracking methods.The tracking results
are not quantified. KLT is also used for Motorcycle detection
in [55] using a multi-level motion pattern learning (MLMP)
framework for trajectory behavior analysis on video surveillance cameras. That work is based on an open source tool for
video traffic analysis [56]. However, the number of trajectories
used to represent a single object could fail under congested
scenarios or when using different camera angles (not necessary
orthogonal to the objects).
C. Other Methods
Other methods for tracking motorcycles are also worth mentioning. A tracking strategy is presented in [26] which combines frame differencing and tracking of edges and corners.
The method, however, is not able to deal with overlapping or
occluded objects often seen in urban traffic scenarios. In [35],
[36] the helmet center of mass is used as a reference point
plus velocity and displacement force for predicting the position
of a motorcycle in the tracking process. In speed evaluation,
results achieved a precision of +/−5 km/hr., comparable with
LIDAR or laser speed detection systems. The system relies
on a “multi-helmet detection method” when two motorcycles
are overlapping. However, it is not clear how it may deal with
passengers. Detection by tracking is a method that employs a
tracking process to improve detection. In [32] for each object

7

detected, a tracker is initialized and it creates a monitoring
window according to the size and position of the object. When
a new frame is processed, the tracking mechanism is adapted
to the size and position of the tracking window based on its
movement estimation [57]. The tracking system can predict
the position of an object, according to its speed and historical
position, needing the use of a localization technique. Tracking
performance is not evaluated with a specific metric, nor
evaluated under occluded scenes. Finally, Shuo and Choi [23]
perform tracking based on a list of target objects and the
criteria for matching is based on histograms, which could
fail if there are overlapping detections, specially when the
proposed system is used on board of a vehicle.
Table I identifies the main algorithms used for detection
and tracking of motorcycles respectively. The third column
corresponds to a cluttering (occlusion) factor defined based
on the KITTI Vision Benchmark suite [58] as (values in
brackets are Maximum Truncation): Low: Fully visible (15%).
Medium: Partly occluded (30%). High: Difficult to see (50%).
It is important to note the variability in metrics and datasets
employed in each algorithm (columns 5 and 6), making it
difficult to establish a standardized baseline for algorithm
performance comparison.
V. D EEP L EARNING
Deep learning (DL) methods have produced a revolution
in the field of computer vision. For pattern recognition the
techniques have shown robustness in classifications tasks,
being able to deal with different ranges of transformations or
distortions as noise, scale, rotation, displacement, illuminance
variance, etc. [59]. In object recognition, feature representation
obtained from DL often outperforms popular features such as
LBP, SURF and HOG [49], [50], [60].
Recent advances on DL achieve object detection in an image
through one of two main methods [61]. In the first case
through a region proposal based detector, with has as a first
stage a region proposal network (RPN) to generate regions of
interest and then a second stage where the regions proposed
by the RPN are used for bounding box regression and object
classification.
The other approach is regression/classification based on Single Stage Detectors (SSDs), which achieve object detection as
a regression problem, analyzing the input image and learning
the class probabilities and bounding box coordinates. These
models can have issues with the detection of small objects or
with objects that appear too close in the image, but such single
shot architectures can produce real time detection results.
A. Region Proposal Based Detectors
Faster R-CNN [62] is one of the most popular architectures
for vehicle detection (but this field moves rapidly). This
architecture evolved from R-CNN [63] and Fast R-CNN [64],
combining features of a fully convolutional network to perform
both region proposals and object detection. R-CNN [63],
combines a selective search [65] algorithm for region proposal (RPN) with CNN features to perform object detection.
This model was used in [66] to classify motorcycles according to the USA’s Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

TABLE I
M OTORCYCLE D ETECTION AND T RACKING A LGORITHMS

scheme, reporting 100% precision and 89% recall, but only
with 16 motorcycles to detect recorded in a highway without
any occlusion. R-CNN generates around 2000 proposal per
image and for each proposal a convolutional operation is
performed for later classification, making the detection procedure quite slow. Fast R-CNN [64], accelerates the detection
process through a single convolution feature map which is
generated from the entire image and using a Region of
Interest (ROI) pooling layer such as different input sizes can
be fed to the classification step.
Methods based on Fast R-CNN approach region proposal
use a selective search [65] which is a bottom-up method

that iteratively groups small segments of the image based
on similarity. This process is computationally expensive and
becomes the model bottleneck.
B. Regression/Classification Based Detectors
Focusing on speed performance (number of frames analyzed per second) at the expense of accuracy, single stage
methods achieve detection without proposals. A single convolutional architecture simultaneously predicts bounding boxes
and associated class scores. The Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD) [67] model consists of a base classification network
(in their case the VGG network [68]) for region proposal,

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ESPINOSA et al.: DETECTION OF MOTORCYCLES IN URBAN TRAFFIC USING VIDEO ANALYSIS

9

TABLE II
D EEP L EARNING A PPLIED TO M OTORCYCLE D ETECTION

suitable for multiple scales, plus a set of convolutional filters
used to produce class scores and to determine the bounding
box positions. Finally, non-maximal suppression (NMS) [69]
is used to eliminate redundant detections. Due to its speed,
it is mostly used in autonomous vehicles and advanced driver
assistance systems (ADAS). A single-stage detector reported
in [70] uses a CNN for motorcycle detection using only
5 convolutional layers. The last convolutional layer, with a
depth of four, splits the negative class (background) into three
different classes, claimed to ease learning, given that the
negative class will encompass many different features difficult
to group into one single class. Redundant detections are
eliminated by non-maximal suppression. The model achieves
an F1-score of 81% in a video dataset recorded from a top
view, which significantly reduces the occlusion of objects.
C. Other Approaches
Some methods perform background subtraction for object
individualization, then CNN is applied to extract features
from the detected moving objects, these features are later
used for classification. Such a method is reported for vehicle
classification in [71], applying the same strategy for feature
extraction in [72], using AlexNet [50] as a feature extractor for
motorcycle classification in urban scenarios. Features extracted
by the CNN model are then classified by a linear SVM,
reaching an almost perfect accuracy on classification (albeit
in a small dataset). The method fails when the background
subtraction is not robust enough to individualize each vehicle.
A model for detection of motorcyclists without helmet is
proposed in [73]. The bounding box for object detection is
provided by a GMM model. There is no special consideration
for overlapping moving objects that move at similar speeds
and could be mixed in the detection. The moving objects
are resized to a fixed size to be passed on to the CNN
model. No special strategy such as pyramids is used to deal
with varying resolution. The CNN model discriminates the
detected moving objects as either motorcycles or background,
extracting discriminative features from the CNN model and
used to perform classification. Finally, the recognition of

motorcyclists without helmets is done by cropping the region
of the motorcyclist head (which may be highly dependent on
the perspective view) and fed to another CNN model which
performs binary classification, according to the features trained
from motorcyclist heads. Helmet detection is also investigated
in [74]. The motorcycle detector uses a linear SVM for a
feature vector classification based on histograms of oriented
gradients (HOG). It is not clear how the method identifies the
motorcycle nor the region expected to contain the rider’s head,
which is passed to a CNN for helmet/no-helmet classification.
Helmet violations are further processed for location of the
license plate using a Haar cascade detector for number plate
recognition. A deep learning-based helmet wearing analysis is
also proposed in [75] combining GMM for foreground object
segmentation and Faster R-CNN for motorcycle detection and
helmet presence. The method also includes a license plate
recognition to issue fines for traffic violations.
Table II identifies the main deep learning algorithms used
for detection of motorcycles.
D. Deep Visual Tracking
Deep learning strategies have been shown to improve the
observation model that depicts the appearance of detected
objects and are thus potentially useful for tracking purposes.
Li et al. [76] provide a review with experimental comparisons
of different deep learning trackers, with important conclusions
including that the usage of CNN models can significantly
improve tracking performance and that deep visual trackers
using end-to-end networks usually perform better than trackers
that merely using feature extraction networks. The recent
work of Chen et al. [77] gives a review of deep learning
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT), categorizing, analyzing and
comparing deep learning MOT methods. The categories are:
1- Multi-object tracking enhancement using deep network
features, 2- Multi-object tracking with deep network embedding and 3- Multi-object tracking with end-to-end deep neural
network learning. This categorization is useful to understand
the following deep learning methods oriented to motorcycles
tracking.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Methods which exploit the use of deep learning features for realizing MOT (category 1) include the work of
Feichtenhofer et al. [78], that proposes a tracker based on
R-FCN [79], an object detection framework which is fully
convolutional up to region classification and regression and
that is extended for multi-frame detection and tracking. The
model is evaluated on ImageNet object detection from a
video dataset [80] achieving an mAP (mean average precision)
of 68.8% on bicycles and 79.8% on motorcycles. Meanwhile,
Gunawan and Jatmiko [81] show an MOT with deep network
embedding (category 2) proposing a Geometric Deep Particle
Filter (GDPF) for motorcycle tracking, looking to improve the
tracker’s transition model and including a stacked denoising
autoenconder (SDAE) [82] as a deep learning observation
model. In spite of the success of the tracker in other domains,
it has poor performance for motorcycles in an ad-hoc video
dataset, mainly due to the vehicles’ hard maneuvering. Overall,
although deep learning methods show good promise, much
remains to be done for tracking of motorcycles, especially in
cluttered conditions.
VI. DATASETS AND P ERFORMANCE M EASURES
There is no clear consensus on the metrics or datasets to
be used for research on motorcycle detection/tracking. This
makes it difficult to compare results and to evaluate with
fair criteria the different strategies used for detection and/or
tracking.
A. Datasets
Realistic (manually annotated, long, varied traffic and
weather conditions, etcds.) public datasets are still a necessity
to assess and compare detection and tracking algorithms proposed by researchers. Generally, they have tended to develop
their own private datasets making comparisons difficult, especially when people do not share algorithms. Clearly, public
annotated data is very useful for training.
Nevertheless, there have been some efforts to produce useful
public datasets. Bileschi [83] describe the CBCL StreetScenes
database which corresponds to more than 8,000 images
of 1280 × 960 pixels. 3,547 of them were labeled and include
categories such as car, pedestrian, bicycle, motorcycles, building, tree, road, sky, sidewalk and store. The Penn-Fudan
dataset is introduced in [84] which includes pedestrian, bike,
human riding bike, umbrella and car object classes, taken
from scenes around campus and urban streets and has the
segmented ground truth of the different classes. There is also
the highly cited PASCAL 2 Visual Object Classes Challenge
2012 (VOC2012) [85], recorded from a stationary vehicle and
popular for bicycle detection. It includes 20 different classes,
containing bicycles, cars and motorcycles. For 3-D detection
algorithms, there is also 174 motorcycle instances with different poses (12-16). The train/val data has 11,530 images
containing 27,450 ROI annotated objects and 6,929 segmentations. This dataset is generally used for training purposes,
to train both for cars and bicycles. Some authors complement
the set to reduce overfitting and to increase the generalization
capabilities of the classifier as in [86]. Cho et al. [87] made
available a public dataset for tracking purposes, consisting of 6
video sequences, intending to capture the ego motion perceived

by a vehicle. CityScapes Dataset [88] comprises a set of
stereo video sequences captured in streets from 50 different
cities (mostly in Germany). 5,000 of these images have high
quality pixel-level annotations while 20,000 additional images
have coarse annotations. The images were recorded during
several months (spring, summer, fall) during daytime and
under good and medium weather conditions. Specially oriented
to motorcycles detection and classification and in some cases
tracking, most authors present results working with their own
datasets that are seldom made public as in [12], [12], [16],
[18], [19], [23], [26], [32]–[35], [37], [40]–[43], [47] and [51].
This is a significant problem to compare results.
For deep learning strategies, mainly used in CNNs, there
is the Caltech 256 [89] dataset that contains 30,608 images
distributed in 256 different categories with at least 798 images
of motorcycles 261 × 154 pixels but only in lateral views,
which is a significant issue since the set explicitly avoids
object rotation and different angles of view. Other datasets
already described and used in DL are [58], [88], [90]–[92]
and [93], which all share the property of having larger amounts
of annotated data for training, but are not related to urban
environments scenarios.
Recent developments related to autonomous driving benchmarks that evaluate object detection, stereo vision and semantic/instance segmentation, include the large-scale 5D semantic
benchmark (BLVD) [94], which defines three kind of “participants”: vehicles, pedestrians and riders (cyclists and motorbikes) due to its dynamic moving. This interesting benchmark
is constructed by a self-driving platform and includes 249,129
3D annotations. Because of the different nature of the views
from vehicle-based cameras, it is not clear how useful this data
could be for traditional CCTV views.
B. Performance Measures
For classification and tracking, there are different strategies to measure the performance obtained when evaluating
algorithms. For this, it is important to differentiate between
detection, classification and tracking measures.
1) Detection Measures: For sliding windows, used to detect
objects, researchers have used False Positives Per Window (FPPW) versus 1-Recall (FalseNeg/TruePos + FalseNeg)
to generate the metric Detection Error Tradeoff (DET) [95].
The x- and y-axes are non-linearly scaled (using standard
normal deviates or just by logarithmic transformation), which
generates curves that are more linear than ROC curves and
exploit most of the image area to highlight the differences.
Also for detection, Bileschi [83] use crop-wise detection
measure, pixel-wise detection and box-wise detection measure,
where an A object is considered to match with a baseline B
object (ground truth) if area A ∩ B/A ∪ B > θ , θ being a
parameter that evaluates how close A and B should match. The
default value is θ = 1/2. This measure is also known as Intersection over Union (IoU) or Jaccard coefficient. Taking into
account the above overlapping criteria, Everingham et al. [96]
propose mAP (mean Average Precision) for the Pascal Visual
Object Classes Challenge (VOC).

m A P = |Q1R |



q∈Q R A P(q)

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(1)

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ESPINOSA et al.: DETECTION OF MOTORCYCLES IN URBAN TRAFFIC USING VIDEO ANALYSIS

where Q R is the set of image queries and q is the specific
query. It is computed by averaging the precision values on
the precision-recall curve where the recall is in the range
[0, 0.1, . . . , 1] (e.g. average of 11 precision values). To be
more precise, they consider a slightly corrected P R curve,
where for each curve point ( p, r ), if there is a different curve
point ( p , r  ) such that p > p and r  >= r , it replaces p with
maximum p of those points.
For object counting, the Grid Average Mean absolute Error
(GAME) [91] simultaneously considers the object count and
the location estimated for the objects. It subdivides the image
into 4 non-overlapping regions and computes the M AE in
each of these sub regions.
N
4
1  l
·
(
|en − gtnl |)
(2)
G AM E(L) =
N
n=1 l=1

2) Classification Measures: Classification algorithms are
typically evaluated through a confusion matrix [97] where,
for unbalanced classes, it is better to use the F1 score, that
could be extended as explained by Chen et al. [43] to deal
with multiples classes. Metrics normally used for classification evaluation are normalized: recall (REC), precision (PRE)
and (F1):
TP
(3)
P RE =
T P + FP
TP
R EC =
(4)
T P + FN
2 · R EC · P R E
(5)
F1 =
R EC + P R E
3) Tracking Measures: For single tracking algorithms
Wu et al. [98], propose OPE (One-time Pass Evaluation),
which is initialized from the ground truth position of the first
frame and the average precision or success rate is evaluated.
Since the algorithm could be sensitive to initialization in the
first frame and most algorithms do not have re-initialization
mechanisms, the authors propose two other metrics: Temporary robustness evaluation (TRE), where the evaluation starts
from different initialization frame and Spatial Robustness
Evaluation (SRE), where different objects states with different
shift or scaling of the ground truth are generated.
Dealing with Multiple Objects Tracking (MOT) Bernardin
and Stiefelhagen [99] propose the CLEAR MOT metrics:
The multiple object tracking precision (MOTP):

i, tdti
(6)
M OT P = 
t, Ct
corresponds to the total error in matched object-hypothesis
pairs over all frames, averaged over the total number of
matches found.
The multiple object tracking accuracy (MOTA):

(m t + f pt + mmet )

(7)
M OT A = 1 − t
t gt
where m t , f pt and mmet are the number of misses, false
positives and mismatches, respectively, for time t.
Later, Wen et al. [93] explain the importance of considering
object detection and tracking jointly in MOT evaluation. For

11

Fig. 4. UMD dataset - Note the significant level of occlusion between
annotated motorcycles.

instance, they propose PR-MOTA which is a three-dimensional
curve characterizing the relation between object detection
performance (precision and recall) and object tracking performance (MOTA).

1
( p, r )ds
(8)
∗ =
2 c
where c is the PR curve and ( p, r ) is the MOTA value
corresponding to precision p and recall r on the PR curve. It is
noted that although (or because) there is a rich set of metrics,
different researchers use different sets, making it complicated
to compare works.
VII. A BASELINE FOR F UTURE R ESEARCHERS
A. The Urban Motorbike Dataset
Due to the lack of a urban motorcycle dataset, to serve
as a common base for research in detection and tracking,
we have created the public Urban Motorbike Dataset (UMD)1
that contains images taken with a Phantom 4® drone, with
an HD camera under windy conditions, which affected the
image stabilizer. Images were resized to 640 × 364 pixels,
containing 318 motorcycle tracks and 56,975 ROI annotated
objects. 60% of the annotated data correspond to occluded
motorcycles. Objects with heights less than 25 pixels were
not annotated (See figure 4).
B. Preliminary Evaluation
1) Detection: An improved version of the model proposed
in [100] called EspiNet, is compared with some of the most
representative models of deep learning single-stage detectors (Yolo V.3 [101]) and Region based detectors (Faster
R-CNN [102]–(VGG16 based)). All these models were trained
from scratch using the UMD dataset. According to recommended practice in deep learning, all three models use 90%
of the data for training and 10% for validation. Training and
test sets were taken randomly, to avoid bias.
Results shows that the EspiNet model achieves an Average
Precision (AP) of 88.8% and an F1-score of 91.8%, outperforming results for YOLO and Faster R-CNN. Table III shows
the evaluation results.
1 http://videodatasets.org/UrbanMotorbike

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

TABLE III

TABLE V

C OMPARATIVE D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR E SPI N ET, FASTER -RCNN
(BASED ON VGG16) [102] AND YOLO V3 [101]

C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR D EEP S ORT T RACKER ON UMD D ATASET,
U SING D ETECTORS E SPI N ET [100], FASTER -RCNN (BASED ON
VGG16) [62] AND YOLO [101]

TABLE IV
C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR MDP T RACKING ON UMD D ATASET, U SING
D ETECTORS E SPI N ET [100], FASTER -RCNN (BASED ON VGG16) [62]
AND YOLO [101]

(see table V), illustrating that the good detection results
obtained with EspiNet yield improved tracking results on
an MOT tracker that uses tracking by detection as its main
strategy.
VIII. D ISCUSSION
A. Challenges

2) Tracking: Two Multiple Object tracking methods are
evaluated on the UMD dataset. In the first instance, an MOT
framework based on Markov decision process (MDP) [103]
is implemented. The tracker modeled the life time of the
tracked object using four sub-space states (Active, Tracked,
Lost and Inactive). The original algorithm has been evaluating
with EspiNet, Yolo and Faster R-CNN (VGG16 based) as
detectors. Additionally to Multiple Object Tracking Precision (MOTP) and Multiple Object Tracking Accuracy (MOTA)
(see section VI-B), another set of metrics are used [104]
that allow understanding tracking behaviour using different
detectors:
• Mostly Track targets (MT), percentage of ground truth
tracks covered by the tracking mechanism for at least
80%.
• Mostly Lost targets (ML, percentage of ground truth
tracks covered by the tracking mechanism less than 20%.
• False Positives (FP)
• False Negatives (FN)
• ID Switches (IDS) ID of the tracks that are erroneously
changed by the algorithm.
• Fragmentations (Frag) the total number of times a trajectory is Fragmented.
Comparative results of MDP tracker applied to UMD dataset
can be compared in table IV. The second MOT tracker
used is a deep learning based tracker: DeepSort [105]. This
tracker relies on motion and appearance information of the
detected object to build the different tracks associated with an
object. The tracking evaluation on the UMD dataset shows
very close results to the obtained by using MDP tracker

The research topic of motorcycles detection and tracking,
especially in urban environments, is still quite open due to different aspects that need to be considered to perform such tasks.
Deep learning (DL) feature representation provides a powerful
alternative over traditional features such as LBP, SURF, HOG
and has shown good results in the standard object recognition
challenges [49], [50], [60]. For motorcycles detection, important advances are found in the literature on feature-classifierbased detection. However, many of the articles discussed here
are not yet suitable for real-time video surveillance scenarios,
given the sliding windows strategy, which is time-consuming.
In some implementations, GPU-based techniques are used to
accelerate the computation, nevertheless it is necessary to find
strategies that take advantage of the perspective of the scene
(e.g. camera calibration), allowing to establish ROIs, reducing
the analyzed region which increases the performance of the
proposed algorithms. Meanwhile DL for vehicle detection,
exploits parallel architectures and, in successful implementations, it performs both region proposals and object detection [62], [64], [106]–[108], with near real-time operation.
Motorcycle hypothesis generation faces the challenge of
having to deal with strong changes in appearance depending on
camera viewpoints. Detectors based on deep learning architectures have shown to be the best option to store complex feature
descriptors as the convolutional layers aggregates complexity
in deeper layers. These DL detectors are successful mainly
for on-board autonomous systems but are yet to be found in
CCTV-based urban surveillance.
The literature reports few studies regarding motorcycle
detection, given the complexity of the analyzed objects. Some
of this complexity has to deal with phenomena such as shadows [32], [109], but there are also the problems of night time,

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ESPINOSA et al.: DETECTION OF MOTORCYCLES IN URBAN TRAFFIC USING VIDEO ANALYSIS

poor illumination conditions and bad weather. Even though
appearance features have been successfully applied to other
types of vehicles, for motorcyclists the problem increases due
to the small size area to detect, making it difficult to measure
symmetry properties and to establish an adequate ROI. The
same happens with color, corner, edges and texture features,
which are affected by illuminations conditions and distance to
the camera. Some of the algorithms use features extracted from
the rider’s helmet establishing relationships between vehicle
and rider [37], but failing to consider real-world situations,
for instance when the vehicle carries more than one passenger
or when riders do not wear helmet protection (but see the work
of Silva et al. [12], [12])
There is still very limited literature dealing with all ranges of
weather and illuminations conditions. Generally, the research
is framed to specific regulations and geographical regions.
The main technical challenge in motorcycles detection
is related to real-world scenarios of traffic under congestion where occlusions could be frequent and using established CCTV infrastructure. In motorcycle detection only
10% of the analyzed algorithms work with some level of
occlusion. Besides the strategies described above, there are
some uses of 3-D models in scenarios where it is necessary to perform classification of vehicles in urban areas,
which demands a previous camera calibration step for better
results [26]–[28], [110]. There is some research [111] that
uses DL working with 3-D models for vehicle detection,
improving the results of previous point cloud based detection approaches. Some of the DL algorithms for motorcycle
detection reviewed here are able to work in partly occluded
scenarios, outperforming traditional methods. There are strategies that fuse RGB images and LiDAR points clouds as inputs
for vehicle detection with high accuracy [112]. Building this
type of datasets and using results derived from them requires
access to LiDAR devices that might not be widely available,
specially when considering existing CCTV infrastructure.
Comparing the different algorithms proposed in the literature is also a very difficult challenge, mainly due to the
lack of universal ground truths to perform a fair benchmark.
Most of the training sets of the algorithms described so far
are not representative enough for the different urban contexts,
unlike efforts for other type of road users such as the KITTI
dataset [58] and Tsinghua-Daimler Cyclist Benchmark [11]
for bicycles, Cars dataset [90], VeRi-776 dataset [113], TRANCOS [91], CompCars dataset [92] and CityScapes Dataset [88]
for other vehicles. To palliate this we have introduced the
UMD dataset (VII-A) specifically aimed for detection and
tracking of motorcycles in urban environments and made
available publicly to the research to advance the state-of-theart in part of this field.
IX. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
One interesting finding is that there exists relatively little
literature on motorbikes detection and tracking. The different
works are done in relatively simple environments and the
algorithms reported are notoriously difficult to apply for data
different from their original reports and in particular to be
deployed for existing CCTV infrastructure.

13

Future research in motorcycle detection, would look to
deal with the wide variability of real world images, including
changes in illumination, drastic object scale changes and view
point, deformations of parts, noisy images, blur resolution,
poor weather conditions, day/night operation, etc. This will
require time-intensive procurement of representative datasets
and their corresponding ground truths.
Motorcycling detection needs to consider that in many
places helmets are not worn, making drivers even more vulnerable. So their study it is also matter of public health and
safety conditions.
The different works cited in this paper point to the need
to improve motorcycles tracking strategies in realistic congested scenarios. Although motion-based methods are useful
for tracking moving objects, they demand important computational resources and involve analysis of various previous
frames for an object can be detected. They may fail to detect
objects with slow relative motion and are also sensitive to
camera movement. It is also worth to mention than despite
the latest developments in Multiple Object Tracking (MOT)
extensively reviewed in [77], to date there are virtually no
studies of such methods for tracking motorcycles.
Deep Learning theory has demonstrated to be useful in the
field of vehicle detection, but there is yet little work on DL
applied to the detection of motorcycles. The principal advantage of this approach (applied to object detection) lies in the
ability to learn richer invariant features via multiple nonlinear
transformations. Nevertheless, an important drawback of CNN
appears in the convolutional layer at each trainable stage,
the kernels/weights employed in the convolution are trained
by back propagation algorithm, which is time- and dataconsuming. Several strategies as pretraining have been proposed to overcome this issue, which becomes a pre-requisite
to implement real-time applications based on CNN.
Region based detectors are popular, covering region proposals and detection modules, that have evolved from
R-CNN, Fast R-CNN and Faster R-CNN reaching even pixel
level segmentation in Mask R-CNN [114]. However, these
architectures demand large amounts of examples to be able
to achieve acceptable results as in all DL models. Most
promising results in real time DL are being obtained by single
stage detectors such as SSD [67], YOLO [115] and specially
RRC [116], which is a state of the art detector, even though
object detection may fail where objects are really small or may
appears quite close each other in the scene.
One interesting topic for deep learning detectors is to
incorporate context reasoning. Despite that before the irruption
of DL, contextual information was already regarded as useful
for improving detection and recognition algorithms, it has
not been extensively studied in the context of deep learning.
This topic offer many possibilities for research, more in the
context-rich urban environments.
An important aspect in motorcycle detection is the need to
have realistic public datasets to allow researchers to benchmark different algorithms in many scenarios, validating the
results in a structured and common way.
Most of the promising employed motorcycle detectors rely
on fully supervised learning schemes. This requires annotated

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

data (ground truth), something that is expensive specially for
DL approaches. It would be interesting to start studying semi
supervised or unsupervised models for motorcycle and bicycle
detectors.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Zhang, C. Zhu, J. K. O. Sin, and P. K. T. Mok, “A novel ultrathin
elevated channel low-temperature poly-Si TFT,” IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 569–571, Nov. 1999.
[2] Motociclistas, un Grave Problema Vial en Colombia. Apr. 30, 2020.
[Online]. Available: http://www.dicyt.com/noticias/motociclistas-ungrave-problema-vial-en-colombia
[3] H. S. Bazargani, R. G. Vahidi, and A. A. Abhari, “Predictors
of survival in motor vehicle accidents among motorcyclists, bicyclists and pedestrians,” Trauma Monthly, vol. 22, no. 2, 2017,
Art. no. e26019, Accessed: Apr. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.traumamon.com/article_100051.html
[4] N. Budi. Patience. Accessed: May 15, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.flickr.com/photos/bukrie/14561469378
[5] WHO
Global
Status
Report
on
Road
Safety
2018.
Accessed:
Apr.
30,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_ystatus/
2018/en/
[6] A. Constant and E. Lagarde, “Protecting vulnerable road users from
injury,” PLoS Med., vol. 7, no. 3, Mar. 2010, Art. no. e1000228.
[7] H. Cho, P. E. Rybski, and W. Zhang, “Vision-based bicycle detection and tracking using a deformable part model and an EKF algorithm,” in Proc. 13th Int. IEEE Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst., Sep. 2010,
pp. 1875–1880.
[8] D. Gerónimo, A. M. López, A. D. Sappa, and T. Graf, “Survey of
pedestrian detection for advanced driver assistance systems,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1239–1258,
Jul. 2010.
[9] M. Enzweiler and D. M. Gavrila, “Monocular pedestrian detection:
Survey and experiments,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 2179–2195, Dec. 2009.
[10] R. Benenson, M. Omran, J. Hosang, and B. Schiele, “Ten years of
pedestrian detection, what have we learned?” 2014, arXiv:1411.4304.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4304
[11] X. Li et al., “A new benchmark for vision-based cyclist detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), Jun. 2016, pp. 1028–1033.
[12] R. R. V. E. Silva, K. R. T. Aires, and R. D. M. S. Veras, “Detection
of helmets on motorcyclists,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 77, no. 5,
pp. 5659–5683, Mar. 2018.
[13] A. Mukhtar and T. B. Tang, “Vision based motorcycle detection using
HOG features,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Signal Image Process. Appl.
(ICSIPA), Oct. 2015, pp. 452–456.
[14] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–110, Nov. 2004.
[15] A. Vedaldi and B. Fulkerson, “VLFeat: An open and portable library of
computer vision algorithms,” in Proc. 18th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
2010, pp. 1469–1472, Accessed: Apr. 30. 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1874249
[16] N. D. Thai, T. S. Le, N. Thoai, and K. Hamamoto, “Learning bag of
visual words for motorbike detection,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Control
Autom. Robot. Vis. (ICARCV), Dec. 2014, pp. 1045–1050.
[17] A. Bosch, A. Zisserman, and X. Munoz, “Representing shape with a
spatial pyramid kernel,” in Proc. 6th ACM Int. Conf. Image Video Retr.,
vol. 2007, pp. 401–408, Accessed: Apr. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1282340
[18] K. Dahiya, D. Singh, and C. K. Mohan, “Automatic detection of bikeriders without helmet using surveillance videos in real-time,” in Proc.
Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2016, pp. 3046–3051.
[19] D. Singh, C. Vishnu, and C. K. Mohan, “Visual big data analytics for
traffic monitoring in smart city,” in Proc. 15th IEEE Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), Dec. 2016, pp. 886–891.
[20] S. A. Ghonge and J. B. Sanghavi, “Smart surveillance system for
automatic detection of license plate number of motorcyclists without helmet,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 86–89,
Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.ijcseonline.org/full paper
view.php?paper_id=1637, doi: 10.26438/ijcse/v6i1.8689.
[21] A. S. Talaulikar, S. Sanathanan, and C. N. Modi, “An enhanced
approach for detecting helmet on motorcyclists using image processing
and machine learning techniques,” in Advanced Computing and Communication Technologies. Singapore: Springer, 2019, pp. 109–119.

[22] I. Bariş, Y. Baştanlar, Classification and Tracking of Traffic Scene
Objects With Hybrid Camera Systems. Piscataway, NJ, USA: Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2018.
[23] Y. Shuo and E.-J. Choi, “A driving support system base on traffic environment analysis,” Indian J. Sci. Technol., vol. 9, no. 47, pp. 286–290,
Dec. 2016, doi: 10.17485/ijst/2016/v9i47/108374.
[24] P. Wonghabut, J. Kumphong, T. Satiennam, R. Ung-arunyawee, and
W. Leelapatra, “Automatic helmet-wearing detection for law enforcement using CCTV cameras,” in Proc. IOP Conf., Earth Environ. Sci.,
vol. 143, 2018, Art. no. 012063.
[25] R. J. Gavadi and S. S. Patil, “Automatic detection of motorcyclist
without helmet using haar cascade classifier,” J. Integr. Sci. Technol.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 33–36, 2018.
[26] S. Messelodi, C. M. Modena, and G. Cattoni, “Vision-based bicycle/motorcycle classification,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 28, no. 13,
pp. 1719–1726, Oct. 2007.
[27] S. Messelodi, C. M. Modena, and M. Zanin, “A computer vision
system for the detection and classification of vehicles at urban
road intersections,” Pattern Anal. Appl., vol. 8, nos. 1–2, pp. 17–31,
Sep. 2005.
[28] N. Buch, J. Orwell, and S. A. Velastin, “Urban road user detection and
classification using 3D wire frame models,” IET Comput. Vis., vol. 4,
no. 2, pp. 105–116, Jun. 2010.
[29] T.-S. Le and C.-K. Huynh, “An unified framework for motorbike
counting and detecting in traffic videos,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv.
Comput. Appl. (ACOMP), Nov. 2015, pp. 162–168.
[30] M. Muzammel, M. Z. Yusoff, and F. Meriaudeau, “Rear-end visionbased collision detection system for motorcyclists,” J. Electron. Imag.,
vol. 26, no. 3, May 2017, Art. no. 033002.
[31] I. Sobel and G. Feldman, “A 3×3 isotropic gradient operator for image
processing, presented at a talk at the Stanford Artificial Project,” in
Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
1968, pp. 271–272.
[32] B. Duan, W. Liu, P. Fu, C. Yang, X. Wen, and H. Yuan, “Real-time onroad vehicle and motorcycle detection using a single camera,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Technol., Feb. 2009, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=4939585
[33] M. A. M. Nong, R. Osman, J. M. Yusof, and R. M. Sidek, “Motorcycle image tracking and edge detections based on simulink software,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Intell. Adv. Syst. (ICIAS), Aug. 2016,
pp. 1–4.
[34] N. K. Kanhere, S. T. Birchfield, W. A. Sarasua, and S. Khoeini, “Traffic
monitoring of motorcycles during special events using video detection,”
Transp. Res. Rec., J. Transp. Res. Board, vol. 2160, no. 1, pp. 69–76,
Jan. 2010.
[35] C.-C. Chiu, M.-Y. Ku, and H.-T. Chen, “Motorcycle detection and tracking system with occlusion segmentation,” in Proc.
8th Int. Workshop Image Anal. Multimedia Interact. Services
(WIAMIS), 2007, p. 32, Accessed: Apr. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=4279140
[36] M.-Y. Ku, C.-C. Chiu, H.-T. Chen, and S.-H. Hong, “Visual motorcycle
detection and tracking algorithms,” WSEAS Trans. Electron., vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 121–131, 2008.
[37] J. Chiverton, “Helmet presence classification with motorcycle detection
and tracking,” IET Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 259–269, Sep.
2012.
[38] S. Sekar, S. Kulam, S. Selvaraj, and P. Saravanan, “An automatic
helmet detection and penalty system using image descriptors and
classifiers,” J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2245–2250,
Jun. 2018.
[39] C. Stauffer and W. E. L. Grimson, “Adaptive background mixture
models for real-time tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 1999, pp. 246–252.
[40] R. Waranusast, N. Bundon, V. Timtong, C. Tangnoi, and P. Pattanathaburt, “Machine vision techniques for motorcycle safety helmet detection,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Image Vis. Comput.
New Zealand (IVCNZ), Nov. 2013, pp. 35–40. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6726989
[41] Y. Dupuis, P. Subirats, and P. Vasseur, “Robust image segmentation for
overhead real time motorbike counting,” in Proc. 17th Int. IEEE Conf.
Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Oct. 2014, pp. 3070–3075.
[42] M. A. Rashidan, Y. M. Mustafah, A. A. Shafie, N. A. Zainuddin,
N. N. A. Aziz, and A. W. Azman, “Moving object detection and classification using neuro-fuzzy approach,” Int. J. Multimedia Ubiquitous
Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 253–266, Apr. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ESPINOSA et al.: DETECTION OF MOTORCYCLES IN URBAN TRAFFIC USING VIDEO ANALYSIS

[43] Z. Chen, T. Ellis, and S. A. Velastin, “Vehicle detection, tracking and
classification in urban traffic,” in Proc. 15th Int. IEEE Conf. Intell.
Transp. Syst., Sep. 2012, pp. 951–956.
[44] Z. Chen and T. Ellis, “Self-adaptive Gaussian mixture model for urban
traffic monitoring system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Workshops (ICCV Workshops), Nov. 2011, pp. 1769–1776.
[45] B. E. Boser, I. M. Guyon, and V. N. Vapnik, “A training algorithm
for optimal margin classifiers,” in Proc. 5th Annu. Workshop Comput.
Learn. Theory, 1992, pp. 144–152, Accessed: Mar. 21, 2018. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=130401
[46] A. González, D. Vázquez, A. M. López, and J. Amores, “On-board
object detection: Multicue, multimodal, and multiview random forest
of local experts,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 3980–3990,
Nov. 2017.
[47] S. Sutikno, I. Waspada, N. Bahtiar, and P. S. Sasongko, “Classification
of motorcyclists not wear helmet on digital image with backpropagation neural network,” TELKOMNIKA (Telecommun. Comput. Electron.
Control), vol. 14, no. 3, Sep. 2016, Art. no. 11281133.
[48] S. Ojha and S. Sakhare, “Image processing techniques for object
tracking in video surveillance- a survey,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pervas.
Comput. (ICPC), Jan. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[49] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, Visualizing and Understanding Convolutional Networks. Springer, vol. 2014, pp. 818–833,
Accessed: Mar. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_53
[50] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., NV, USA, 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[51] Z. Chen and T. Ellis, “Multi-shape descriptor vehicle classification for
urban traffic,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Digit. Image Comput. Techn. Appl.
(DICTA), Dec. 2011, pp. 456–461.
[52] A. Yilmaz, O. Javed, and M. Shah, “Object tracking: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 38, no. 4, p. 13, Dec. 2006,
Accessed: Apr. 30, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/1177352.1177355
[53] M. H. Zaki, T. Sayed, and X. Wang, “Computer vision approach for
the classification of bike type (motorized versus non-motorized) during
busy traffic in the city of shanghai,” J. Adv. Transp., vol. 50, no. 3,
pp. 348–362, Apr. 2016.
[54] C. G. Harris et al., “A combined corner and edge detector,” in Proc.
Alvey Vis. Conf., 1988, vol. 15, no. 50, pp. 10–5244.
[55] M. G. M. Mohamed and N. Saunier, “Applications of multi-level
pattern learning to traffic scene interpretation and anomaly detection,”
Centre Interuniversitaire Recherche sur les Réseaux d’Entreprise, CIRRELT, Montreal, QC, Canada, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[56] S. Jackson, L. F. Miranda-Moreno, P. St-Aubin, and N. Saunier,
“Flexible, mobile video camera system and open source video analysis
software for road safety and behavioral analysis,” Transp. Res. Rec., J.
Transp. Res. Board, vol. 2365, no. 1, pp. 90–98, Jan. 2013.
[57] W. Liu, X. Wen, B. Duan, H. Yuan, and N. Wang, “Rear vehicle
detection and tracking for lane change assist,” in Proc. IEEE Intell.
Vehicles Symp., Jun. 2007, pp. 252–257.
[58] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for
autonomous driving? The KITTI vision benchmark suite,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2012,
pp. 3354–3361, Accessed: Apr. 20, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6248074
[59] I. Arel, D. C. Rose, and T. P. Karnowski, “Deep machine Learning–
A new frontier in artificial intelligence research [Research Frontier],”
IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 13–18, Nov. 2010.
[60] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei,
“ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255.
[61] P. Soviany and R. Tudor Ionescu, “Optimizing the trade-off
between single-stage and two-stage object detectors using image
difficulty prediction,” 2018, arXiv:1803.08707. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08707
[62] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards realtime object detection with region proposal networks,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 91–99.
[63] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Rich feature
hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014,
pp. 580–587.
[64] R. Girshick, “Fast R-CNN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., Dec. 2015, pp. 1440–1448. [Online]. Available: http://www.cvfoundation.org/openaccess/content_iccv_2015/html/Girshick _Fast_RCNN_ICCV_2015_paper.html

15

[65] J. R. R. Uijlings, K. E. A. van de Sande, T. Gevers, and
A. W. M. Smeulders, “Selective search for object recognition,” Int.
J. Comput. Vis., vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 154–171, Sep. 2013.
[66] Y. O. Adu-Gyamfi, S. K. Asare, A. Sharma, and T. Titus, “Automated
vehicle recognition with deep convolutional neural networks,” Transp.
Res. Rec., J. Transp. Res. Board, vol. 2645, no. 1, pp. 113–122, 2017.
[67] W. Liu et al., “SSD: Single shot MultiBox detector,” 2015,
arXiv:1512.02325. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325
[68] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556
[69] P. F. Felzenszwalb, R. B. Girshick, D. McAllester, and D. Ramanan,
“Object detection with discriminatively trained part-based models,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 1627–1645,
Sep. 2010.
[70] C.-K. Huynh, T.-S. Le, and K. Hamamoto, “Convolutional neural
network for motorbike detection in dense traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 6th
Int. Conf. Commun. Electron. (ICCE), Jul. 2016, pp. 369–374.
[71] J. E. Espinosa, S. A. Velastin, and J. W. Branch, “Vehicle detection
using alex net and faster R-CNN deep learning models: A comparative
study,” in Advances in Visual Informatics, H. B. Zaman et al., Eds.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 3–15.
[72] J. E. Espinosa, S. A. Velastin, and J. W. Branch, “Motorcycle classification in urban scenarios using convolutional neural networks for feature
extraction,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Syst. (ICPRS),
2017, pp. 1–6.
[73] C. Vishnu, D. Singh, C. K. Mohan, and S. Babu, “Detection of
motorcyclists without helmet in videos using convolutional neural
network,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), May 2017,
pp. 3036–3041.
[74] K. C. D. Raj, A. Chairat, V. Timtong, M. N. Dailey, and M. Ekpanyapong, “Helmet violation processing using deep learning,” in Proc.
Int. Workshop Adv. Image Technol. (IWAIT), Jan. 2018, pp. 1–4.
[75] B. Yogameena, K. Menaka, and S. Saravana Perumaal, “Deep learningbased helmet wear analysis of a motorcycle rider for intelligent surveillance system,” IET Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1190–1198,
Jul. 2019.
[76] P. Li, D. Wang, L. Wang, and H. Lu, “Deep visual tracking: Review
and experimental comparison,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 76, pp. 323–338,
Apr. 2018.
[77] S. Chen, Y. Xu, X. Zhou, and F. Li, “Deep learning for multiple object tracking: A survey,” IET Computer Vision, vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 355–368, Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://digitallibrary.theiet.org/content/journals/10.1049/iet-cvi.2018.5598
[78] C. Feichtenhofer, A. Pinz, and A. Zisserman, “Detect to track and track
to detect,” 2017, arXiv:1710.03958. Accessed: Feb. 28, 2019. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.03958
[79] J. Dai, Y. Li, K. He, and J. Sun, “R-FCN: Object detection via regionbased fully convolutional networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2016, pp. 379–387.
[80] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
[81] A. A S Gunawan and W. Jatmiko, “Geometric deep particle filter
for motorcycle tracking: Development of intelligent traffic system in
Jakarta,” Int. J. Smart Sens. Intell. Syst., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 429–463,
2015.
[82] N. Wang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Learning a deep compact image representation for visual tracking,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2013, pp. 809–817.
[83] S. M. Bileschi, “StreetScenes: Towards scene understanding in still
images,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2006.
[84] L. Wang, J. Shi, G. Song, and I.-F. Shen, Object Detection Combining Recognition and Segmentation. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2007, pp. 189–199, Accessed: Nov. 9, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-76386-4_17
[85] M. Everingham, S. M. A. Eslami, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams,
J. Winn, and A. Zisserman, “The pascal visual object classes challenge:
A retrospective,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 98–136,
Jan. 2015.
[86] A. Chayeb, N. Ouadah, Z. Tobal, M. Lakrouf, and O. Azouaoui,
“HOG based multi-object detection for urban navigation,” in Proc.
17th Int. IEEE Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Oct. 2014,
pp. 2962–2967.
[87] H. Cho, P. E. Rybski, and W. Zhang, “Vision-based 3D bicycle tracking
using deformable part model and interacting multiple model filter,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., May 2011, pp. 4391–4398.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[88] M. Cordts et al., “The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene
understanding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 3213–3223.
[89] Caltech256. Accessed: Jan. 11, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://vision.caltech.edu/Image_Datasets/Caltech256
[90] J. Krause, M. Stark, J. Deng, and L. Fei-Fei, “3D object representations
for fine-grained categorization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Workshops, Dec. 2013, pp. 554–561. [Online]. Available: http://
www.cv-foundation.org/openaccess/content_iccv_workshops_2013/
W19 /html/Krause_3D_Object_Representations_2013_ICCV_paper.
html
[91] R. Guerrero-Gómez-Olmedo, B. Torre-Jiménez, R. López-Sastre,
S. Maldonado-Bascón, and D. Onoro-Rubio, Extremely Overlapping
Vehicle Counting. Springer, 2015, pp. 423–431. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-19390-8_48
[92] L. Yang, P. Luo, C. C. Loy, and X. Tang, “A large-scale
car dataset for fine-grained categorization and verification,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Boston, MA,
USA, 2015, pp. 3973–3981. [Online]. Available: http://www.cvfoundation.org/openaccess/content_cvpr_2015/html/Yang_A_LargeScale_Car_2015_CVPR_paper.html
[93] L. Wen et al., “UA-DETRAC: A new benchmark and protocol
for multi-object detection and tracking,” 2015, arXiv:1511.04136.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.04136
[94] J. Xue et al., “BLVD: Building a large-scale 5D semantics benchmark
for autonomous driving,” 2019, arXiv:1903.06405. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.06405
[95] A. Martin, G. Doddington, T. Kamm, M. Ordowski, and
M. Przybocki, “The DET curve in assessment of detection task
performance,” Nat. Inst. Standards Technol., Gaithersburg MD, USA,
Tech. Rep., 1997.
[96] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and
A. Zisserman, “The Pascal visual object classes (VOC) challenge,” Int.
J. Comput. Vis., vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 303–338, Jun. 2010.
[97] S. V. Stehman, “Selecting and interpreting measures of thematic classification accuracy,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 77–89,
Oct. 1997.
[98] Y. Wu, J. Lim, and M.-H. Yang, “Online object tracking: A benchmark,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2013,
pp. 2411–2418.
[99] K. Bernardin and R. Stiefelhagen, “Evaluating multiple object tracking
performance: The CLEAR MOT metrics,” EURASIP J. Image Video
Process., vol. 2008, pp. 1–10, Dec. 2008.
[100] J. E. Espinosa, S. A. Velastin, and J. W. Branch, “Motorcycle
detection and classification in urban scenarios using a model based
on faster R-CNN,” 2018, arXiv:1808.02299. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02299
[101] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLOv3: An incremental
improvement,” 2018, arXiv:1804.02767. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.02767
[102] J. Huang et al., “Speed/accuracy trade-offs for modern convolutional object detectors,” 2016, arXiv:1611.10012. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10012
[103] Y. Xiang, A. Alahi, and S. Savarese, “Learning to track: Online multiobject tracking by decision making,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 4705–4713.
[104] F. Yin, D. Makris, and S. A. Velastin, “Performance
evaluation of object tracking algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Workshop Perform. Eval. Tracking Surveill. Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil: Citeseer, 2007, p. 25. [Online]. Available:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/ad76/bdc7d06a7ec496ac788d667c6ad5
fcc0fe41.pdf
[105] N. Wojke, A. Bewley, and D. Paulus, “Simple online and realtime
tracking with a deep association metric,” 2017, arXiv:1703.07402.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.07402
[106] Q. Fan, L. Brown, and J. Smith, “A closer look at faster R-CNN for
vehicle detection,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), Jun. 2016,
pp. 124–129.
[107] S. Wang, F. Liu, Z. Gan, and Z. Cui, “Vehicle type classification
via adaptive feature clustering for traffic surveillance video,” in Proc.
8th Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. (WCSP), Oct. 2016,
pp. 1–5.
[108] F. Chabot, M. Chaouch, J. Rabarisoa, C. Teulière, and T. Chateau,
“Deep MANTA: A Coarse-to-fine many-task network for joint 2D and
3D vehicle analysis from monocular image,” 2017, arXiv:1703.07570.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.07570

[109] X. Wen, H. Yuan, C. Song, W. Liu, and H. Zhao, “An algorithm based on SVM ensembles for motorcycle recognition,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Veh. Electron. Saf., Dec. 2007, pp. 1–5,
Accessed: Jan. 20, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://yadda.icm.
edu.pl/yadda/element/bwmeta1.element.ieee-000004456371
[110] K. Schindler, A. Ess, B. Leibe, and L. Van Gool, “Automatic detection
and tracking of pedestrians from a moving stereo rig,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 523–537, Nov. 2010.
[111] B. Li, “3D fully convolutional network for vehicle detection in point
cloud,” 2016, arXiv:1611.08069. Accessed: Feb. 14, 2019. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.08069
[112] J. Dou, J. Xue, and J. Fang, “SEG-VoxelNet for 3D vehicle detection
from RGB and LiDAR data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA),
May 2019, pp. 4362–4368.
[113] X. Liu, W. Liu, H. Ma, and H. Fu, “Large-scale vehicle reidentification in urban surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2016, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7553002/
[114] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” 2017,
arXiv:1703.06870. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06870
[115] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
once: Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 779–788.
[116] J. Ren et al., “Accurate single stage detector using recurrent
rolling convolution,” 2017, arXiv:1704.05776. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.05776
Jorge E. Espinosa was born in Bogotá, Colombia,
in 1973. He received the B.S. degree in system
engineering from University Foundation Los Libertadores, Colombia, in 2001, and the M.Sc. degree
in artificial intelligence from Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven, Belgium, in 2003. Since 2010, he has been
a full time Professor with Politécnico Colombiano
Jaime Isaza Cadavid, Medellín, Colombia. He is
teaching in the areas of programming and artificial
intelligence. In the last ten years as a Professor,
he has scientific publications in national and international journals and congresses, mostly related to optimization, artificial
intelligence, and related areas. In 2019, he received the Meritorious Doctorate
Thesis Award from the Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Sergio A. Velastín (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.Sc. and M.Sc. (Research) degrees in electronics and the Ph.D. degree from The University of Manchester, Manchester, U.K., in 1978,
1979, and 1982, respectively, for research on vision
systems for pedestrian tracking and road-traffic
analysis. He worked in industrial research and development before joining King’s College London, U.K.,
in 1991, and Kingston University London, where he
became the Director of the Digital Imaging Research
Centre and a Full Professor of Applied Computer
Vision. In 2015, he moved to the University Carlos III of Madrid, Spain,
where he was a Marie Curie Professor. He is currently a Senior Research
Scientist with Zebra Technologies Corporation and a Visiting Professor with
the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid and the Queen Mary University of
London, U.K. He is a fellow of IET.
John W. Branch received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in mines and metallurgic engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in systems engineering from the Universidad
Nacional de Colombia, Medellín, in 1995, 1997,
and 2007, respectively. Since 2000, he has been a
full time Professor with the Universidad Nacional
de Colombia. In the last 15 years as a Professor,
he has made 160 scientific publications in national
and international journals and congresses, mostly
related to his research theme computer vision and
related areas. He has directed 30 master’s theses and
three Ph.D. theses and currently directs 10 Ph.D. theses and five master’s
theses. He has received the following prizes and distinctions: Thesis of
Meritorious degree, Postgraduate in systems engineering from the Universidad
Nacional de Colombia in 1997, the Meritorious degree Work on mining and
metallurgy engineering from the Universidad Nacional de Colombia in 1995,
the Fourth Place Best Grade Contest VI version from the Universidad Nacional
de Colombia in 1996, and the Meritorious Doctorate Thesis from Universidad
Nacional de Colombia in 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Exeter. Downloaded on June 16,2020 at 13:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

