Notebook-as-a-VRE (NaaVRE): from private
notebooks to a collaborative cloud virtual research
environment
Zhiming Zhao1,2, Spiros Koulouzis1,2, Riccardo Bianchi1,2, Siamak Farshidi1, Zeshun Shi1, Ruyue Xin1, Yuandou
Wang1, Na Li1, Yifang Shi2,3, Joris Timmermans2,3, W. Daniel Kissling2,3.
1
Multiscale Networked Systems, University of Amsterdam
2
LifeWatch ERIC, Virtual Lab & Innovation Center (VLIC)
3
Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics (IBED), University of Amsterdam
Science Park 904, 1098XH, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
{z.zhao | s.koulouzis | r. Bianchi | s.farshidi | z.shi2 | r.xin | y.wang8 | n.li | y.shi | j.timmermans |
w.d.kissling}@uva.nl
Abstract— Virtual Research Environments (VREs) provide
user-centric support in the lifecycle of research activities, e.g.,
discovering and accessing research assets, or composing and
executing application workflows. A typical VRE is often
implemented as an integrated environment, including a catalog of
research assets, a workflow management system, a data
management framework, and tools for enabling collaboration
among users. In contrast, notebook environments like Jupyter
allow researchers to rapidly prototype scientific code and share
their experiments as online accessible notebooks. Jupyter can
support several popular languages used by data scientists, such as
Python, R, and Julia. However, such notebook environments do
not have seamless support for running heavy computations on
remote infrastructure or finding and accessing collaborative
software code inside notebooks. This paper investigates the gap
between a notebook environment and a VRE and proposes an
embedded VRE solution for the Jupyter environment called
Notebook-as-a-VRE (NaaVRE). The NaaVRE solution provides
functional components via a component marketplace and allows
users to create a customized VRE on top of the Jupyter
environment. From the VRE, a user can search research assets
(data, software, and algorithms), compose workflows, manage the
lifecycle of an experiment, and share the results among users in the
community. We demonstrate how such a solution can enhance a
legacy workflow that uses Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)
data from country-wide airborne laser scanning surveys for
deriving geospatial data products of ecosystem structure at high
resolution over broad spatial extents. This enables users to scale
out the processing of multi-terabyte LiDAR point clouds for
ecological applications to more data sources in a distributed cloud
environment.
Keywords—Virtual research environment, Jupyter, Cloud

observational data or medical images, AI models, workflows,
and infrastructure services from different parties for building
computational experiments. Specifically, researchers need
effective collaborative support environments for conducting
advanced data sciences research [3]: discovery, access,
interoperation, and re-use of the research assets, and integration
of all resources into cohesive observational, experimental, and
simulation investigations with replicable workflows.
Virtual Research Environments (VREs) support scientists in
the life cycle of their research activities by enabling effective
discovery and selection of data, software services, and other
relevant research assets from different sources, construction of
cohesive workflows, and collaboration with other scientists [4].
VREs are also called Virtual Laboratories or Science Gateways
[5, 22]. Examples include VRE4EIC1, D4Science2, EVEREST3, and Galaxy4. Graphical environments, workflow
management systems, and data analytics tools are typical
components of such environments. The development of a VRE
is often driven by practices from a specific user community,
e.g., for managing scientific workflows and sharing their
research results, resulting in specific graphical environments,
workflow management systems, and data analytics tools to be
components of the VRE. Furthermore, a VRE is often
implemented as an integrated environment that provides users
with pre-configured sources of data and software tools, and
functional components for managing research activities. While
providing many benefits to the scientific community, the
adoption of such integrated VREs is often hampered by the high
time investment for learning the new technologies and
incompatible experiences, e.g., managing scientific workflows.

I.
INTRODUCTION
The study of many scientific problems, e.g., big
environmental challenges or cancer diagnosis, requires large
data volumes, advanced modeling techniques, and distributed
computing facilitates [1,2]. To conduct such investigations,
researchers often have to reuse research assets, e.g.,

A notebook environment, such as Jupyter5 (in contrast to a
VRE), allows researchers to more quickly and effectively
initiate their research activities, such as implement the
experimental logic using scripting languages (such as Python,
R, and Julia) to document and share the experiments with
necessary inputs/outputs and parameters as self-contained
documents (namely notebooks) [6]. Compared to integrated

1

4

2

https://vre4eic.ercim.eu/

https://www.d4science.org
3
https://ever-est.eu/

5

https://usegalaxy.org/
https://jupyter.org/

1

VREs that require online access control (e.g., D4Science), or
heavy client-side software on the local machine (e.g., for
workflow management), notebook environments such as
Jupyter, demonstrate their advantages of light, portable, and
easy to use. As such, it remains presently the most often used
method for performing research, even though the approach
faces challenges of utilizing remote infrastructure [7] and
restricts collaborative research designs inherent to a VRE.
There is a clear need for improving the Jupyter environment
to meet the requirements for open sciences. In this paper, we
first review the current VRE support of the Jupyter environment
and identify the gaps. After that, we present a lightweight
solution to extend a Jupyter notebook environment as a
collaborative Virtual Research Environment, which provides
features for effectively managing research resources, remote
cloud automation, and workflows. Finally, we demonstrate the
key features of our solution, using a use case that bridges
ecology and remote sensing, i.e., processing multi-terabyte
point clouds from national airborne laser scanning surveys to
derive high-resolution geospatial layers of ecosystem structure
over broad spatial extents.
II.

PROBLEM DESCRIPTION AND RELATED WORK

Research activities in data-centric sciences are often a
combination of many steps. We can often identify several
closely related activities centered around domain-specific
scientific research, data management, and infrastructure
utilization for remote computation (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Different research activities that might be involved
in data-intensive research6.

For instance,
1. When doing scientific research on a specific problem, a
scientist often starts with making a hypothesis for a
scientific problem and then discovers and acquires data and
software components that can be used to design an
experiment or analysis for the study. After that, the scientist
would process the data by executing a workflow with
specific input data and configuration of parameters of the
workflow steps (e.g., via algorithms or tools). When the data
set is large, such an experiment or analysis often requires a
large computing and storage capacity that remote
6

The lifecycle is derived from typical activities in workflow
management, data management (based on ENVRI reference

computing facilities can only provide. After the execution,
the scientist then analyzes and publishes the results. In
general, this traditional scientific research is not a simple
sequential flow, but follows an iterative approach; for
instance, a scientist can return to their original workflow
design, execution, and analysis steps multiple times.
Depending on specific practices, those activities can be
structured in different orders or combinations, but the main
components of this research life cycle remain the same [18].
2. Data management involves a set of activities that make
data a valuable resource for subsequent (re-)use. These
activities are often conducted by dedicated data managers or
support staff. For instance, they start by acquiring data from
remotely deployed sensors, in-situ field measurements,
observation networks, or other data infrastructures. Experts
will curate those data via steps like quality control,
metadata annotation, and archiving. Those curated data can
then be published and made accessible to external users via
metadata catalogs or data repositories. In this context, data
can also be processed for different products (process data
products) to serve dedicated users, e.g., early warning
platforms often need near-real-time data products from
environmental observation networks to be quickly
accessible in their big simulation platforms. Finally, there
are services to make such data (either raw data or derived
data products) adequate for new scientific experiments or
analyses (use data). The activities in data management thus
often differ among domains but can be generalized in
typical steps of a data life cycle [17]. Those five basic
activities illustrated here (Fig. 1) are common ones we
observed from research infrastructures in the environmental
and earth science domains and modeled in the ENVRI
Reference Model7.
3. Infrastructure utilization-related activities can be
typically seen in data centers or computing centers for
scientific research. The users who want to run scientific
workflows on such infrastructures first have to request a
certain capacity of resources from the infrastructure based
on the requirement of the workflow (e.g., type of
computation and volume of the data). If the requests can be
handled, the infrastructure operator typically makes an
agreement, also called Service Level Agreement (SLA) with
the user. After that, the infrastructure operator will allocate
the resources and schedule the execution of the request on
the infrastructure. During the execution, the operator will
also actively monitor the status of the execution and provide
support to the users when specific errors occur (e.g., failure
of the workflow).
The boundaries among those cycles in many cases are often
blurred. For instance, a domain researcher often spends lots of
time on data acquisition, quality control, and processing during
their daily activities, as we can observe from ecologists. In the
ecology domain, data acquisition and curation are also seen as
model), and cloud resource management. There are certainly
other ways to describe them.
7
https://envri.eu/envri-rm-v2-0-released-today/

2

required steps in scientific research. Moreover, some of the
activities can be outsourced to third parties, or largely
automated, e.g., infrastructure utilization, or generating specific
data products. Additionally, some activities are still very
difficult to be supported by a single IT system, because of their
high dependencies on human actions. Nevertheless, we can
clearly see the complexity a scientist faces when managing ITrelated activities in the research lifecycle; an effective research
support system is needed.
A. Virtual research environment and research lifecycle
To effectively support scientists to conduct those research
activities, a VRE should provide tools and platforms to:
Manage research assets (data, software, and other types of
objects): e.g., hide the complexity of discovering research
assets across different sources, provide interfaces to the other
relevant infrastructures (e.g., research infrastructures in the
ENVRI cluster8), and curate, publish and share the newly
created research assets.
Manage scientific experiments: compose the logic (workflows)
of the scientific experiments using available components,
execute the workflow locally or using remote infrastructure,
and analyze the final results.
Manage collaboration with users from the community, e.g., for
sharing research assets and cooperative work on similar
problems.
To enable those basic functionalities, a VRE needs to
1. Be flexible and efficient: the VRE should first allow users
to flexibly conduct their research activities, preferably
without changing much of their existing daily practices. It
means the tools and functionality provided by the VRE
should be customized to the specific domain and problems
that researchers are working on.
2. Automate the standardized processes or the processes that
scientists clearly understand but do not wish to iterate
much time on, e.g., data clearing pipelines and
preprocessing tasks.
3. Be reproducible of the processes is crucial for the
scientists to analyze the experiment processes, in
particular when an experiment is distributed on a large
scale.
4. Provide trustworthiness on the quality and content of
data products when they are from an external source and
on the services and model used for processing the data.
B. Limits of the Jupyter environment
As an essential type of research asset, notebooks allow users
to effectively reproduce the experiments and to develop them
for new purposes further. Still, there are several challenges to
being an effective VRE for enabling open sciences and
innovations across disciplines on a large scale:
1. Difficult to find and access a notebook at the granularity
level of functions and components. Researchers often share
their Notebooks via version control systems, like Git;
8
9

www.envri.eu

insufficient metadata of the notebook, particularly the
monolithic nature of the notebooks, hampers the discovery
of the latter, especially the components (namely Cells) in
the notebook.
2. Lack of flexibility to reuse a notebook as part of a distributed
workflow. When reusing an existing notebook, a
researcher often needs part of the code fragments and
integrates it as part of the other code to build logic for a
new experiment. The often tightly coupled functions in the
notebook, in particular, the implicit dependencies on the
libraries make the reusability and extension of the code
fragments difficult.
3. Difficult to scale the notebook to remote infrastructures.
Current notebook environments, like Jupyter Hub9, couple
a pre-configured infrastructure (e.g., via Cloud IaaS) to
dynamically load instances of a notebook and perform
computing tasks [8]. When processing huge data volumes
or computing complex tasks, dynamically allocated cloud
resources other than that pre-configured capacity are often
needed for parallelizing distributed computing tasks.
Solutions to seamlessly automate the infrastructure
services with the scheduling of tasks in the notebook are
still lacking or not widely adopted.
C. VRE development challenges
As a special kind of software, the commercial market of VREs
is still quite small; most of the developments still originate from
the academic and research communities. This also brings lots
of challenges to the sustainability of the VREs.
First, the development of the VRE interface is time-consuming
and often customized to research assets in a specific domain, or
a specific type of computing infrastructure. It often creates gaps
between the VRE and the daily practices of a scientific domain.
Second, the openness of the VRE is crucial for a scientist; not
only a connection to the new infrastructure is needed for scaling
experiments out, but also the connection to new communities
for expanding collaboration to different scientific domains.
Moreover, the interface between VRE and the underlying
research infrastructures (for accessing data, services, and other
research assets) and computing infrastructure (for performing
computing tasks) requires standardized metadata and APIs
offered by those infrastructures. However, the low
interoperability among current research infrastructures, makes
such interfaces non-trivial.
To tackle those challenges, we propose a VRE solution that can
be embedded in the daily practices which current scientists
perform in their research activity and aim to expand their daily
environment to a VRE with minimal effort. An embedded VRE
solution called Notebook-as-a-VRE (NaaVRE) is proposed.
D. Related Work
There are several Jupyter-based systems [19-21] aimed to
improve the notebook environment for supporting scientific
experiments. The Earth Observation Data Access Gateway
(EODAG) [19] Jupyter extension10 enables end-users to query
10

https://github.com/CS-SI/eodag-labextension

https://jupyter.org/hub

3

satellite imagery from various image providers, using the
EODAG library via notebook environment. The results of the
query can be transformed to code cells into the active Python
notebook to further process the dataset. This extension focuses
only on integrating a specific data resource with Jupyter. Binder
[20] can automate the launch of a Jupyter notebook from a Git
repository and thus simplify the reproduction of the Jupyter
notebooks-based data experiments. As a highly interactive
environment, cells in a notebook are often developed, tested,
and executed in an arbitrary order by the user, which may result
in less reusability and reproducibility of the notebook. Wang et
al. [21] used code analysis techniques to analyze the
dependencies among cells and to restore the reproducibility of
the notebook. These existing examples address specific aspects
of the scientific experiments, e.g., data access, query,
automation of the execution, or reproducibility of cells based
on dependencies. These solutions do not aim to cover the entire
lifecycle of an experiment from a Virtual Research
Environment point of view.
III.

NOTEBOOK-AS-A-VRE (NAAVRE)

The Notebook-as-a-VRE (NaaVRE) solution focuses on
building a VRE by extending the notebook environment of the
end-users. Currently, we design it based on Jupyter [6], a widely
used tool for daily research activities in lots of data-centric
sciences. In principle, other environments like R-Studio can
also be considered. In Jupyter, popular programming languages
used by data scientists including Python, R, Julia can be
supported by specific execution kernels.
A. Requirements
The proposed solution should meet the following requirements:
1. Should be integrated into the Jupyter environment,
without forcing users to change their basic practices on
conducting experiments.
2. Seamless support for adding VRE features, e.g.,
publishing/sharing components with the community,
running tasks on remote cloud infrastructure, and search
tools for new data sources.
3. Open for new functional components. The NaaVRE
should further be exploited as an open ecosystem to
include new community contributed components.
4. The solution should be highly customizable and allow a
user to reconfigure the environment based on the needs.
5. The solution should be efficient and fault-tolerant; users
in the NaaVRE ecosystem are connected via a
decentralized framework for sharing data and other
research assets.
B. System architecture
Based on the requirements, we design the NaaVRE as an
ecosystem, which provides required VRE functional
components as scalable services (e.g., microservices), and can
be deployed as Jupyter extensions on the user environment (Fig.
2).
Figure 2. NaaVRE and the Jupyter client.

The NaaVRE provides the functional components (services) via
a repository (also called marketplace) which allows users to
browse and select functional components to make a customized
VRE experience.
Typical functional components include:
A. VRE knowledge base with published research assets (data
sets, software components, and tools) produced and shared
by the VRE community.
B. The semantic search engine provides a web interface to
do a search from external catalogs (e.g., for data sets,
services, or other assets), and also API for the application
to invoke via Jupyter.
C. Component containerizer as a tool enabling users to
effectively select code fragments (cells) from the notebook,
generate reusable workflow building blocks (e.g., RESTful
services), and encapsulate the building blocks as
deployable containers (e.g., Docker).
D. Experiment manager allows users to design experiments
by selecting building blocks from the VRE knowledge
base, composing the logical relations and dependencies
among components, configuring the parameters, input, and
output, executing the experiment via workflow bus, and
monitoring the progress of the experiment.
E. Distributed workflow bus uses a software bus concept
[15] to manage runtime infrastructures for automating the
deployment of workflow instances (namely experiments),
scheduling the execution of each experiment, and
managing information of different workflow instances over
the distributed ledger and the distributed data mesh. The
distributed workflow bus enables collaboration among
workflows
from
different
users,
e.g.,
publishing/subscribing
experiment
results,
and
reproducing a specific result.
F. Remote Infrastructure Automator that automates the
execution of a workflow on the remote infrastructure,
including a) plan the cloud infrastructure (networked
virtual machines) based on workflow description,
providers, and execution requirements, b) automates the
provision of virtual machines, the configuration of
Kubernetes clusters, and c) schedules the execution of the
workflow.
G. Authentication and authorization infrastructure (AAI)
[9] that enables the NaaVRE to 1) authenticate users and
manages authentications when the users need to access
remote infrastructures (e.g., cloud or HPC), and to 2)

4

authorize users to access specific services and research
assets of the VRE.
H. The distributed data mesh provides an interface for
applications to share data content in remote infrastructure,
e.g., via centralized storage or a peer-to-peer file system. It
provides a transparent layer for workflow applications to
exchange data.
I. A distributed VRE ledger that provides an immutable
logging and ledger management framework for NaaVRE
users to publish assets and trace the evolution of digital
objects. We assume user communities are organized as a
consortium of institutions or individuals. The VRE ledger
is thus based on a consortium blockchain environment.
J. Provenance and logs explorer that allows the users to
navigate the provenance information and system logs,
analyze the specific events, and reproduce a workflow
when necessary.
K. The NaaVRE dashboard will be the interface to configure
the components, visualize the status of VRE components,
e.g., the progress of the workflow execution, and utilization
of the remote infrastructures.
L. eScience DevOps (development and operation) provides
an automated pipeline to handle the lifecycle of the
scientific code from code in the notebook cell to a selfcontained and independent cloud computational entity.
Those components aim to support scientific activities identified
in Fig. 1.
Figure 3: How NaaVRE supports scientific activities. The data
management and infrastructure utilization parts are the same as
Fig. 1.

(F). In this context, the NaaVRE will automate the access to
different infrastructures (including data repositories and cloud)
using (G). The NaaVRE will also customize the data mesh for
provisioning data for the execution (H). The runtime processes
will be logged, and key processes will be tracked and recorded
via the distributed ledger system (I). The user can analyze the
experiment results using provenance and data analytics tools
(J). The entire processes of the research activities will be
presented via a dashboard (K) and automated using an eScience
DevOps pipeline where needed (L).
The NaaVRE framework relies on external catalogs to access
research assists from specific communities, e.g., the LifeWatch
catalog for the ecology community, and the ENVRI-Hub
catalog for the ENVRI community. The NaaVRE also relies on
the external infrastructures to execute the remote workflows,
including e-Infrastructure, e.g., EGI and EOSC, and cloud
environments, e.g., Azure and AWS.
C. How can NaaVRE be operated?
The NaaVRE can be seen both as a framework of the VRE
technologies and as a community to enable users to collaborate
via the Jupyter environment (Fig. 4).
Figure 4. The distributed research community is enabled by
NaaVRE.
eScience developers/ researchers of
a Virtual Lab

5

Virtual Lab
administrator

4

1

NaaVRE PaaS
operator

NaaVRE

3

NaaVRE

NaaVRE Virtual Lab

NaaVRE
Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)
2
7
6

NaaVRE
Services
Market place

a

b c

d

e

An individual eScience
developer/ researcher

As shown in Fig. 3, a domain researcher can use NaaVRE
knowledge base (A) to check existing solutions or similar
problems in the community and search (B) existing data,
software, and other relevant research assets for tackling the
problem. The user can work on the experiment logic using the
Jupyter environment or load existing code. The user can create
reusable components by containerizing them as dockers (C),
assembling them as workflow (D), and configuring the input
data to create an experiment. The experiment will be executed
by the workflow bus (E) in several steps, including planning
infrastructure based on the workflow, automating the
infrastructure services, and deploying the workflow component

NaaVRE
NaaVRE User

The NaaVRE can be operated by an organization as a Platformas-a-Service (PaaS). Through the PaaS:
1. One (e.g., a Virtual Lab administrator) can create dedicated
virtual labs (step 1) for a group of users, e.g., based on
specific domain problems.
2. The NaaVRE PaaS will instantiate a Virtual Lab (VL) based
on required resource capacity and configurations of the
NaaVRE components, and deploy the VL in the
infrastructure (step 2). A VL is typically based on the
Jupyter Hub environment, with NaaVRE components
installed.
3. VL users, e.g., eScience developers or researchers, will
create their Jupyter environment via the Virtual Lab (step 3
and 4) and perform the research activities (step5)
4. Via the NaaVRE functional components, VL users can get
access to the customized catalog (step 6) create dynamic
resources (step 7) for running workflows.

5

The VL will initialize a blockchain node and P2P file node
needed by distributed ledger and data mesh.
An individual user can also customize their Jupyter
environment as private VL using NaaVRE technology (see the
bottom part of Fig. 4)
1. A NaaVRE user can select relevant services from the
NaaVRE marketplace and install them in the local
environment (step a).
2. The users will also register themselves in the NaaVRE
distributed ledger system (i.e., Blockchain) to access the
ledgers (step b).
3. The user will install a Peer 2 Peer file node on the local
environment to connect with the NaaVRE distributed data
mesh. The shared layer can also be used for sharing data
objects at the runtime of the workflow (step c).
4. Using the NaaVRE components, the user can then search
assets (data or services) from the external catalog (e.g., from
LifeWatch or ENVRI) to design an experiment (step d).
5. The code prototyped by the user in Jupyter will be executed
on remote infrastructure via the distributed workflow bus by
the experiment manager (step e).

relevant ones in a basket. The search engine provides an
API for the Jupyter users to retrieve research assets from
the basket in the cells of a notebook (Fig. 5).

5.

IV.
IMPLEMENTATION AND CURRENT STATUS
The development of the NaaVRE follows the current
industrial and community standards in cloud computing and
scientific workflow management to develop the functional
components.
A. Development methodology
Some of the components are joint with the other projects,
including SWITCH11, VRE4EIC12, ARTICONF13, ENVRIFAIR14, and BlueCloud15. The development also follows the
iterative and agile development software engineering practice,
users are engaged in the development with different case
studies.
The technical development team closely works with the
domain scientists (the last three co-authors): discuss the use
cases, identify user stories, define implementation plan, select
technologies, test implementation via use cases and continue.
B. Current prototype
The NaaVRE is developed as an open-source project16.
Currently, the following components have been developed:

Figure 5. the search engine prototyped using Elastic Search17.

C. Component Containerizer, also known as FAIR-Cells
extension [7], is an interactive tool for a researcher to 1)
interactively encapsulate selected Cells of a notebook as
RESTful services based on input and output variables of
the Cells, 2) dockerize the services with customized base
images (via Docker file), 3) publish the products (Docker
images) in either a centralized way, namely on a remote
repository (currently Docker Hub) and a catalog (e.g.,
LifeWatch catalog), or a decentralized way, namely using
Blockchain (for metadata) and IPFS (for dock images). In
this way, the notebook’s fragments can reach better
findability and accessibility towards the FAIR digital
objects. Fig. 6 shows the screen snapshot of the FAIRCells extension. On the right side, the user can edit and
select the relevant code fragments, and the tool will
automatically capture the input and output of the Cell and
visualize the component on the left side. From the left side
panel, the user can generate the RESTful representation of
the code in the Cell and dockerize it.
Figure 6. Screen snapshot of the component containerizer
extension.

A. VRE Knowledge base is developed jointly with the
ENVRI-FAIR project [10]. It is operated as a community
service for the users of NaaVRE. The documents and
metadata of the research assets will be indexed and
captured in the knowledge base.
B. VRE search engine. The search engine is developed using
information retrieval techniques [22] and provides an
interface for VRE users to search assets (e.g., data sets,
Web API or notebooks) from the community, and select
11

15

12

16

http://switch-project.eu/
https://vre4eic.ercim.eu/
13
https://articonf.eu/
14
http://envri.eu/envri-fair/

https://www.blue-cloud.org/
https://github.com/QCDIS/NaaVRE
17
https://opensemanticsearch.org/

6

Instances created by split

D. Experiment manager. The NaaVRE provides an effective
way to allow users to describe the logic of the experiments
(Fig. 7). The experiments can be based on the components
created using the Containerizer tool. We use Common
Workflow Language syntax to describe the workflow
logic, which can be mapped onto different flow languages
executed by a specific engine, e.g., ARGO flow or
TOSCA. Using the Experiment Manager, a user can use
two built-in components “split” and “merge” to parallelize
the execution of certain cells on large data collection, as
shown in Fig 7.
Figure 7. Screen snapshot of the workflow composer in the
manager component.

F. Remote infrastructure automator, also called the CloudCells extension, automates Cloud infrastructure
provisioning and the deployment of Docker images on the
Cloud infrastructure. Cloud-Cells uses SDIA (the Software
Defined Infrastructure Automator), a framework
developed by the same team for planning, provisioning,
and deploying applications on multi-Cloud environments
[11] (Fig. 9). A VRE can have a number of pre-provisioned
virtual infrastructure (namely networked virtual
machines); it can dynamically request and provision virtual
infrastructure requested by a user for running specific
workflows. A user should provide his/he own credential to
obtain the dynamic resources. A dynamic infrastructure
can be released after the workflow is finished.
Figure 9. The screen snapshot of the Infrastructure Automator
and Experiment Manager.

E. Distributed workflow bus is currently prototyped using
ARGO framework. It interacts with the infrastructure
automator to 1) prepare the cloud services and 2) automate
the deployment and execution of an experiment. It also
registers metadata and runtime information of the
experiments on the distributed ledgers and enables
collaborations among VRE users. Fig. 8 shows a screen
snapshot of the experiment information in the current
workflow bus. When the workflow contains “split” and
“merge” operations, the workflow bus will dynamically
create instances of the required workflow component based
on provided data sources, and collect the output to a given
data destination (in Fig. 8).
Figure 8. The runtime information of the distributed workflow
bus.

G. Authentication and authorization infrastructure (AAI)
currently follows the best practices and guidelines from the
initiatives like EOSC, ENVRI, and LifeWatch. It currently
supports the public identity providers like GitHub. Virtual

7

Lab administrators can log in to the NaaVRE platform
using the identities.
H. The distributed data mesh currently supports both
centralized (WebDAV18) and decentralized (IPFS19)
paradigms.
I. The distributed VRE ledger currently uses HyperLedger
Fabric20. Instead of using a public blockchain, we design
the ledger of a community as a consortium of a set of
trusted organizations. A new organization of the NaaVRE
can set up a new node and join the network of the VRE
ledger. Individual users can join the network using the
identity of their organization. Other identity providers will
also be supported in the future.
J. Provenance explorer and analysis. The tool provides an
interface for users to interactively explore the system logs
and the provenance of the workflow and to identify the
anomalies and reproduce the workflows or problems [12].
The provenance of the workflow is captured using PROVO21. Via the explorer, researchers will be able to
interactively explore the provenance (see the upper part of
Fig. 10) of the workflow among cells (created using
Experiment manager) together with the workflow
processes and system logs (see the middle and bottom part
of Fig. 10), and identify the anomalies during the
execution.
Figure 10. The provenance explorer and analysis interface. A
user can visualize the provenance graph, workflow process
and infrastructure performance logs.

distributed ledgers; currently, the ARGO framework is
used to prototype the dashboard.
L. eScience DevOps applies DevOps practices, including
continuous integration (CI) and continuous deployment
(CD) to automate the lifecycle of the experiments in the
VRE. The NaaVRE uses Git to manage versions of the
source of the cell, and DockerHub or IPFS to store the
images of containerized cells. The containerization and
orchestration of the cells in a workflow on remote cloud
infrastructure can be automated via the eScience DevOps
pipeline when new changes are made on the source.
V.

CASE STUDIES: LidarAirCloud virtual lab22

Airborne Laser Scanning (ALS) data derived from Light
Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) technology allow the
construction of Essential Biodiversity Variables (EBVs) of
ecosystem structure with high resolution at the landscape,
national and regional scales [14]. Researchers nowadays often
process LiDAR data for various ecological applications, and
rapidly prototype using script languages like R or python and
share their experiments via scripts or more recently via
notebook environments, such as Jupyter.
A legacy program called ‘Laserchicken’[13] was developed in
a previous project to process country-wide LiDAR point clouds
in a local environment (e.g., the Dutch national ICT
infrastructure called SURF). It is a Python tool that focuses on
extracting features (i.e. statistical properties) of user-defined
subsets of point cloud data [13]. The basic workflow of
Laserchicken is shown in Fig. 11. It consists of four core
modules (load, compute neighbors, features, export) (as shown
in Fig. 11 in blue color), and two optional modules (filter,
normalize) (as shown in Fig. 11 in grey color), which provide a
processing workflow for feature extraction from LiDAR point
clouds, with file-based input and output.
Fig. 11 Laserchicken workflow for processing LiDAR point
clouds

K. The NaaVRE dashboard visualizes the runtime status of
the scientific experiments, infrastructure status, and
18

http://www.webdav.org/
https://ipfs.io/
20
https://www.hyperledger.org/use/fabric
21
https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/
19

22

The development of the use case is partially supported by the EOSC ENVRIFAIR early adopter program (EAP) project, and the Azure AI on earth project.

8

In this simple example, the user does not have to search for
data from an extensive collection of the data sources; data sets
from Table 1 have been considered.

However, a user currently can only use the Laserchicken
application either on the dedicated infrastructure or on the local
machine to process the LiDAR data. Running a specific part of
the code on remote infrastructure is often challenging for
domain scientists. The capacity of the local machine or a given
infrastructure also limits the volume of data. This use case
(LidarAirCloud) is to demonstrate how the NaaVRE solution
enables scientists to scale experiments to large data volumes,
different data sources, or new models.
Using the NaaVRE, the user first needs to set up the
environment, e.g., selecting the following components:
Experiment manager, component containerizer, distributed
workflow bus, remote infrastructure automator, distributed
data mesh, and distributed ledger, as shown in the upper part of
Fig. 11. Since not all the components have been integrated, only
a small subset has been used.
Figure 12. The workflow of the use case.

23

Country

Multi-year

Finland

Partly

Netherlands

Yes

Spain

Partly

Denmark

Yes

Estonia

Yes

Slovenia

Yes

UK

Partly

Point density
1–2 pt/m

2

4 TB

2

16 TB

2

5 TB

0.1–20 pt/m
0.5–2 pt/m
4–5 pt/m

2

8 TB

0.2–18 pt/m
2-5pt/m

Data volume*

2

2

0.5-16 pt/m

2.5 TB

2

45 TB

Table 1: Details of LiDAR data from example countries in
Europe. Data volume represents how much data storage is
needed, based on the number of files available in each
download portal and the average size of each file. The data used
in this paper is from the Netherland23.
The sequences under the NaaVRE components in Fig. 11
demonstrate the basic steps in the use case.
1. After preparing the LiDAR data that need to be processed,
the user can use Experiment manager to design an
experiment based on the ‘Laserchicken’ workflow in the
Jupyter environment. In this use case, the workflow was
designed as the following steps: first, loading the raw
LiDAR data (LAS files) covering a sample area in the
Netherlands; second, normalizing the height of the point
cloud; third, computing neighbors with a target volume of
an infinite cylinder at 1-meter radius; fourth, extracting
selected features (e.g., 95th percentile of normalized
height, coefficient of variance of normalized height); and
finally, exporting the enhanced point cloud with added
features (PLY files).
2. Via the experiment manager, the user will need to
containerize the code as portable containers using the
containerizer component provided in the Jupyter
environment. Each step of the user’s workflow described
above can be containerized (and then published) as a
container, providing a specific function of processing

https://www.ahn.nl/ahn-viewer

9

LiDAR data. This and the previous step can be interactive
until a concrete experiment is composed. An experiment
can be seen as a concrete workflow with configurations on
input data and other necessary parameters.
3. After the experiment is ready, the user will submit the
experiment to the distributed workflow bus for
execution.
4. The distributed workflow bus will then plan cloud
services (e.g., Virtual Machines and their topology) for
running the workflow by using the Remote
infrastructure automator.
5. The distributed workflow bus will configure the
distributed data mesh needed by the experiment, e.g.,
centralized (based on WebDav) or decentralized (based on
IPFS) option.
6. The distributed workflow bus will also register the
experiment in the VRE ledger.
7. The remote infrastructure automator will automate the
provision of the cloud services on selected providers. At
this stage, the component of AAI will be used.
8. The distributed data mesh will also provision the data sets
needed by the workflow. In this use case, pre-designed
workflow can be upscaled and applied to other countrywide LiDAR datasets (with multi-terabyte data volume),
as shown in Table 1. Ecosystem structure products
covering whole countries or regions can be generated and
used for further analysis.
9. The distributed workflow bus will schedule the workflow
execution after components are being deployed (in step 4)
and data is being prepared (in step 6).
10. After the execution, the user can visualize the results via
the notebook. Fig. 13 shows an example visualization of
generated data products of the Netherlands from the
Laserchicken workflow.

program for ENVRI-FAIR, and Microsoft Azure through the
AI for Earth program) to process a much bigger dataset than in
a local environment [16].
VI. DISCUSSION
In this use case, we demonstrate how a user can use
NaaVRE to enhance the Jupyter lab to execute the legacy
Laserchicken workflow in remote infrastructures. In the paper,
the target users are mainly developers or researchers using
eScience approaches. They normally have interdisciplinary
knowledge across scientific domains and computing
techniques. They use the Jupyter environment for developing
scientific code; the eScience researchers focus more on the
scientific output, while the eScience developers are dedicated
programmers for scientific code and often act as support staff
for eScience or regular domain researchers.
The NaaVRE architecture aims to be open and flexible for
other systems on workflow management. From the current
prototype, we have specifically considered the following
aspects.
Connect with other workflow management systems. NaaVRE
aims to support other workflow systems besides the default one
included in the marketplace as an open ecosystem. The
NaaVRE can execute the workflows supported by an external
workflow management system via the workflow bus, where the
description will be wrapped and executed by invoking the
external engine. The distributed workflow bus can dynamically
launch the external engine when no such running engine
instance is accessible. However, this integration also requires
the external workflow management system to provide a
backend engine with a well-defined interface for remote
invocations.
On the other hand, the distributed workflow bus and the remote
infrastructure automator are decoupled from the user interface
of the Notebook. In principle, the backend can be integrated
with the workflow composition interface of the third-party
workflow management interface for designing and executing
the workflow. However, this integration requires efforts for
adapting the external composition interface to generate the
required workflow description of the NaaVRE and to invoke
the workflow bus and Remote infrastructure automator in
NaaVRE.
The above two options give opportunities for applying NaaVRE
in the current service architecture in the LifeWatch ERIC,
besides operating the NaaVRE as an online Platform-as-aService.
VII. SUMMARY

Figure 13. The visualization of two data products of ecosystem
structure (height & structural complexity) of the Netherlands
from the Laserchicken workflow. The LiDAR data were
collected during the third Dutch national airborne laser
scanning flight campaign (AHN3, Actueel Hoogtebestand
Nederland).

The NaaVRE framework is jointly developed in the context of
ENVRI-FAIR, LifeWatch, Clarify, and several other projects.
We closely interact with the users from ecology, marine, and
other domains in the environmental and earth sciences. The
framework is developed based on the Jupyter environment. The
architecture aims to deliver an open ecosystem for the VRE
components needed by the users. The framework is also going

The initial version of the NaaVRE components has been tested
on the cloud environment (offered by the EOSC early adopter

10

to be used as a framework for supporting distributed machine
learning workflows in the medical domain24.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially funded by the European
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program by the
ENVRI-FAIR project grant agreement No 824068, by the
BLUECLOUD project grant agreement No 862409, by the
LifeWatch ERIC, by the ARTICONF project grant agreement
No 825134, and by the project CLARIFY under the Marie
Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 860627. The use case
has also been supported by an AI for Earth Grant (AI4E-1111Q3N7-20100806) from Microsoft which provided access to the
Azure Cloud in the context of the LidarAirCloud project. The
Laserchicken workflow was developed in the eEcoLiDAR
project funded by the Netherlands eScience Center (grant
number ASDI.2016.014).

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

24

REFERENCES
Vermeulen A., Glaves H., Pouliquen S., Kokkinaki A. (2020)
Supporting Cross-Domain System-Level Environmental and Earth
Science. In: Zhao Z., Hellström M. (eds) Towards Interoperable
Research Infrastructures for Environmental and Earth Sciences.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52829-4_1.
S. Tuli, S. Tuli, G. Wander, P. Wander, S. S. Gill, S. Dustdar, R.
Sakellariou, and O. Rana, “Next-generation technologies for smart
healthcare: challenges, vision, model, trends and future
directions,” Internet Technol. Lett., vol. 3, no. 2, 2020.:
https://doi.org/10.1002/itl2.145
Jeffery, K., Pursula, A., Zhao, Z.: ICT Infrastructures for
Environmental and Earth Sciences. In: Zhao, Z. and Hellström, M.
(eds.) Towards Interoperable Research Infrastructures for
Environmental and Earth Sciences. pp. 17–29. (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52829-4_2.
Martin, P., Remy, L., Theodoridou, M., Jeffery, K., Zhao, Z.:
Mapping heterogeneous research infrastructure metadata into a
unified catalogue for use in a generic virtual research environment.
Future Generation Computer Systems. 101, 1–13 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.05.076.
Miller, M.A., Pfeiffer, W., Schwartz, T.: The CIPRES science
gateway: enabling high-impact science for phylogenetics
researchers with limited resources. In: Proceedings of the 1st
Conference of the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment: Bridging from the Extreme to the Campus and
Beyond, Chicago, IL (2012)
J. M. Perkel, “Why jupyter is data scientists’ computational
notebook of choice,” Nature, vol. 563, pp. 145–146, 2018.
Kruijer W., Wang Y., Koulouzis S., Li N., Bianchi R., Zhao, Z.:
FAIR-Cells: an interactive tool for enabling the FAIRness of code
fragments in Jupyter notebooks, in the proceedings of the
international conference of High-Performance Computing and
Simulation (HPCS) (2020), Spain.
Henderson, M. L., Krinsman, W., Cholia, S., Thomas, R., &
Slaton, T. (2020). Accelerating Experimental Science Using
Jupyter and NERSC HPC. In G. Juckeland & S. Chandrasekaran
(Eds.), Tools and Techniques for High Performance Computing
(pp. 145–163). Springer International Publishing.
Paolini A., Scardaci D., Liampotis N., Spinoso V., Grenier B.,
Chen Y. (2020) Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting.
In: Zhao Z., Hellström M. (eds) Towards Interoperable Research

Infrastructures for Environmental and Earth Sciences.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52829-4_14.
[10] Zhao, Z., Liao, X., Martin, P., Maduro, J., Thijsse, P., Schaap, D.,
Stocker, M., Goldfarb, D., Magagna, B.: Knowledge-as-a- Service:
A Community Knowledge Base for Research Infrastructures in
Environmental and Earth Sciences. In: Proceedings of IEEE
SERVICES
conf..
pp.
127–132.
(2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/SERVICES.2019.00041.
[11] Koulouzis, S., Martin, P., Zhou, H., Hu, Y., Wang, J., Carval, T.,
Grenier, B., Heikkinen, J., Laat, C., Zhao, Z.: Time‐critical data
management in clouds: Challenges and a Dynamic Real‐Time
Infrastructure Planner (DRIP) solution. Concurrency Computat
Pract Exper. e5269 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.5269.
[12] Ahanach, E. el K., Koulouzis, S., Zhao, Z.: Contextual Linking
between Workflow Provenance and System Performance Logs. In:
2019 15th International Conference on eScience (eScience). pp.
634–635.
IEEE,
San
Diego,
CA,
USA
(2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/eScience.2019.00093.
[13] C. Meijer, M. W. Grootes, Z. Koma, Y. Dzigan, R. Gonc ̧alves, B.
Andela, G. van den Oord, E. Ranguelova, N. Renaud, and W. D.
Kissling, “Laserchicken—A tool for distributed feature calculation
from massive LiDAR point cloud datasets,” SoftwareX, vol. 12, p.
100626, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.c
om/science/article/pii/S2352711020303393
[14] Valbuena, R., O’Connor, B., Zellweger, F., Simonson, W.,
Vihervaara, P., Maltamo, M., Silva, C. A., Almeida, D. R. A.,
Danks, F., Morsdorf, F., Chirici, G., Lucas, R., Coomes, D. A. &
Coops, N. C. (2020). Standardizing ecosystem morphological
traits from 3D information sources. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution, 35, 656-667.
[15] Zhao, Z., Belloum, A., De Laat, C., Adriaans, P., Hertzberger, B.:
Using Jade agent framework to prototype an e-Science workflow
bus. In: Seventh IEEE International Symposium on Cluster
Computing and the Grid (CCGrid ’07). pp. 655–660. IEEE, Rio de
Janeiro,
Brazil
(2007).
https://doi.org/10.1109/CCGRID.2007.120.
[16] Koulouzis, S., Shi, Y, Wan, Y., Bianchi, R., Kissling, D., Zhao, Z.,
Enabling “LiDAR data processing” as a service in a Jupyter
environment, Poster, EGU21
[17] Victoria Stodden. 2020. The data science life cycle: a disciplined
approach to advancing data science as a science. Commun. ACM
63, 7 (July 2020), 58–66. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3360646
[18] Tenopir, C., Allard, S., Douglass, K., Aydinoglu, A.U., Wu, L.,
Read, E., Manoff, M., Frame, M.: Data Sharing by Scientists:
Practices and Perceptions. PLoS ONE. 6, e21101 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021101
[19] Jean-Christophe Desconnets, Gregory Giuliani, Yaniss Guigoz,
Pierre Lacroix, Andiswa Mlisa, Mark Noort, Nicolas Ray, Nancy
D. Searby, GEOCAB Portal: A gateway for discovering and
accessing capacity building resources in Earth Observation,
International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and
Geoinformation, Volume 54, 2017, Pages 95-104, ISSN 03032434, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2016.09.010.
[20] Ragan-Kelley, Benjamin, and Carol Willing. "Binder 2.0Reproducible, interactive, sharable environments for science at
scale." Proceedings of the 17th Python in Science Conference (F.
Akici, D. Lippa, D. Niederhut, and M. Pacer, eds.). 2018.
[21] Wang, J., Kuo, T., Li, L., Zeller, A.: Assessing and restoring
reproducibility of Jupyter notebooks. In: Proceedings of the 35th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering. pp. 138–149. ACM, Virtual Event Australia (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416585.
[22] Kacsuk, P. ed: Science Gateways for Distributed Computing
Infrastructures: Development Framework and Exploitation by
Scientific User Communities. Springer International Publishing :

http://www.clarify-project.eu

11

Imprint: Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-11268-8.
[23] 1.Parodi, A., Kranzlmüller, D., Clematis, A., Danovaro, E.,
Galizia, A., Garrote, L., Llasat, M.C., Caumont, O., Richard, E.,
Harpham, Q., Siccardi, F., Ferraris, L., Rebora, N., Delogu, F.,
Fiori, E., Molini, L., Foufoula-Georgiou, E., D’Agostino, D.:
DRIHM(2US):
An
e-Science
Environment
for
Hydrometeorological Research on High-Impact Weather Events.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. 98, 2149–2166
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-16-0279.1.

12

