Artificial Intelligence Review
(2025) 58:350
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-025-11256-0

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images
using deep learning: a survey
Kun Wang1,2 · Zi Wang1,2 · Zhang Li1,2 · Ang Su1,2 · Xichao Teng1,2 · Erting Pan1,2 ·
Minhao Liu3 · Qifeng Yu1,2
Accepted: 2 May 2025
© The Author(s) 2025

Abstract
Oriented object detection is a fundamental yet challenging task in remote sensing (RS),
aiming to locate and classify objects with arbitrary orientations. Recent advancements
in deep learning have significantly enhanced the capabilities of oriented object detection
methods. Given the rapid development of this field, a comprehensive survey of the recent
advances in oriented object detection is presented in this paper. Specifically, we begin
by tracing the technical evolution from horizontal object detection to oriented object detection and highlighting the specific related challenges, including feature misalignment,
spatial misalignment, oriented bounding box (OBB) regression problems, and common
issues encountered in RS. Subsequently, we further categorize the existing methods into
detection frameworks, OBB regression techniques, feature representation approaches, and
solutions to common issues and provide an in-depth discussion of how these methods address the above challenges. In addition, we cover several publicly available datasets and
evaluation protocols. Furthermore, we provide a comprehensive comparison and analysis
involving the state-of-the-art methods. Toward the end of this paper, we identify several
future directions for oriented object detection research.
Keywords Oriented object detection · Remote sensing · Deep learning

1 Introduction
With the rapid advancement of remote sensing (RS) technologies, an increasing number of
images with various resolutions and distinct spectra can be easily obtained by optical satellites or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Naturally, the research community has an imperative need to investigate a variety of advanced technologies for automatically and efficiently
processing and analyzing massive numbers of RS images. As a pivotal foundation for automatically analyzing RS images, object detection is aimed at identifying objects belonging
to predefined categories within the given images and regressing a precise localization for

Kun Wang, Zi Wang, and Zhang Li have contributed equally to this work.
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

13

350

Page 2 of 61

K. Wang et al.

each object instance (Liu et al. 2020; Zou et al. 2023). Currently, object detection is a vital
component in a broad range of RS applications, including intelligent monitoring (Zhao et al.
2018), precision agriculture (Osco et al. 2021), urban planning (Burochin et al. 2014), port
management (Zhang et al. 2021), and military reconnaissance (Liu et al. 2022).
Objects in RS images typically exhibit arbitrary orientations due to their bird’s-eye view
(BEV) acquisition perspectives, making the general (horizontal) object detection methods
inadequate. In contrast with general object detection, which involves performing object
localization via a horizontal bounding box (HBB), oriented object detection (also called
rotated object detection) employs an oriented bounding box (OBB) to tightly pack the oriented object, as shown in Fig. 1. This OBB can not only provide orientation information
but also precisely locate the object. Consequently, oriented object detection has attracted
considerable attention, especially within the past five years. Although many methods are
available, a comprehensive survey specifically focused on oriented object detection is still
lacking. Given the continued maturity and increasing concerns about this field, this paper
seeks to present a thorough analysis of recent efforts and systematically summarize their
achievements.

1.1 Comparisons with related surveys
Many prominent surveys have been published in the object detection field in recent years,
as summarized in Table 1. Numerous notable surveys have concentrated on generic (horizontal) object detection, which aims to detect horizontal objects in natural scenarios (Liu
et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2019; Zou et al. 2023). These surveys covered various
aspects, including deep-learning-based detection frameworks, training strategies, feature
representation approaches, evaluation metrics, and typical applications.
Furthermore, several efforts have been devoted to specific categories, such as text detection (Ye and Doermann 2015) and pedestrian detection (Cao et al. 2022). Additionally,
recent surveys have focused on object detection tasks conducted under specific conditions,
including small object detection (Cheng et al. 2023), few-shot object detection (Pannone
2022), and weakly supervised object detection (Zhang et al. 2022).
Although a few surveys have analyzed and summarized the RS object detection domain,
they frequently lack in-depth analyses of oriented object detection (Cheng and Han 2016;
Li et al. 2020, 2021; Han et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022). Zhang et al. (2023) classified the sub-

Fig. 1 Comparison between OBB and HBB (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022). a OBB representation of
objects. b is a failure case of the HBB representation, which brings high overlap compared to a

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 3 of 61

350

Table 1 Summary of related object detection surveys in recent years
1.5px Survey title
Publication
Descriptions
1.5px Deep learning for generic object
IJCV 2020
A comprehensive survey of the recent
detection: a survey (Liu et al. 2020)
progress in generic object detection brought
about by deep learning
Recent advances in deep learning for
Neucom 2020 A survey focuses on deep learning in generic
object detection (Wu et al. 2020)
object detection from detection components,
learning strategies, and applications
Object detection with deep learning: a
TNNLS 2020 A review on deep learning for generic object
review (Zhao et al. 2019)
detection and other specific subtasks
Object detection in 20 years: a surPROC 2023
A survey focuses on object detection spanvey (Zou et al. 2023)
ning over 20 years of history
Text detection and recognition in imagery: TPAMI 2015 A survey about methods, sub-problems,
a survey (Ye and Doermann 2015)
and special issues of text detection and
recognition
From handcrafted to deep features for
TPAMI 2022 A survey on recent deep features based
pedestrian detection: a survey (Cao et al.
methods in pedestrian detection
2022)
Towards large-scale small object detecTPAMI 2023 A survey of small object detection and two
tion: survey and benchmarks (Cheng et al.
large-scale small object detection bench2023)
marks under driving scenario and aerial
scene
Few-shot object detection: a survey (Pan- ACM 2022
A survey on few-shot object detection
none 2022)
through data augmentation, transfer learning,
distance metric learning, and meta-learning
A survey on object detection in optical
ISPRS 2016
A review on traditional object detection
remote sensing images (Cheng and Han
methods in RS images
2016)
Object detection in optical remote sensing ISPRS 2020
A review on deep learning based horizontal
images: a survey and a new benchmark (Li
object detection in RS, and a large-scale,
et al. 2020)
publicly available benchmark for RS object
detection
Remote sensing object detection meets
GRSM 2023
A survey on challenges and advances in RS
deep learning: a meta-review of challenges
object detection, including multiscale object
and advances (Zhang et al. 2023)
detection, rotated object detection, weak
object detection, tiny object detection, and
object detection with limited supervision
Ship detection and classification from op- CJA 2021
A survey of RS ship detection schemes from
tical remote sensing images: a survey (Li
1978 to 2020
et al. 2021)
Methods for small, weak object detection GRSM 2021
A survey of challenges and recent advances
in optical high-resolution remote sensing
for RS small, weak object detection
images: a survey of advances and challenges (Han et al. 2021)
Deep learning for unmanned aerial
GRSM 2022
A survey on deep learning approaches in
vehicle-based object detection and trackUAV object detection and tracking from
ing: a survey (Wu et al. 2022)
static object detection, video object detection, and multiple object detection
A comprehensive survey of oriented object ESWA 2023
A survey on oriented object detection,
detection in remote sensing images (Wen
including rotation invariance, anchor-free
et al. 2023)
mechanism, and loss function.
Top generic object detection. Middle object detection focusing on specific tasks. Bottom RS object detection

13

350

Page 4 of 61

K. Wang et al.

categories belonging to RS object detection as oriented object detection, providing only a
brief introduction to OBB representation and rotation-insensitive feature learning methods.
Wen et al. (2023) focused only on describing the details of previously developed oriented
object detection methods.
Unlike previously presented object detection surveys, which focused on general object
detection methods (Liu et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2019; Zou et al. 2023), other
related fields (Ye and Doermann 2015; Cao et al. 2022; Cheng et al. 2023; Pannone 2022;
Zhang et al. 2022), horizontal RS object detection (Cheng and Han 2016; Li et al. 2020,
2021; Han et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2022), or limited numbers of oriented object detection
models (Zhang et al. 2023; Wen et al. 2023), this work systematically and comprehensively
reviews the recent advances in the field. In particular, relative to the existing surveys concerning oriented object detection (Zhang et al. 2023; Wen et al. 2023), our survey provides
a deeper, more comprehensive dive into this field; offers a better taxonomy of the literature; and presents discussions regarding the current challenges, comparisons, and future
research directions. It involves in-depth analyses of various aspects, many of which, to our
knowledge, have never been discussed in oriented object detection surveys. In particular, we
review the technical evolution from horizontal to oriented object detection and summarize
the main challenges. We systematically summarize and discuss the recent advancements
developed under the proposed taxonomies (including detection frameworks, OBB regression techniques, feature representation approaches, and solutions to common issues). We
provide a comprehensive comparison among the state-of-the-art methods on typical datasets, along with an in-depth analysis of the pros and cons of these methods.

1.2 Scope
Fig. 2 shows the increasing number of publications related to "oriented object detection" or
"rotated object detection" over the past decade. In particular, in the last five years, explosive growth has been observed in the number of papers published on deep-learning-based
oriented object detection methods, rendering it impractical to review all of them. Conse-

Fig. 2 Increasing number of publications in oriented object detection from 2010 to 2024

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 5 of 61

350

quently, it is necessary to establish selection criteria to limit our focus to the influential
papers published in top journals and conferences. Owing to these constraints, we extend
our sincere apologies to authors whose works are not included in this paper. Notably, we
restrict our attention to oriented object detection methods for single images. Nevertheless,
for completeness and improved readability, some well-known works on horizontal object
detection are also included.

1.3 Contributions
Our contributions are manifested in four aspects.
(1) A comprehensive review of the technical evolution from horizontal object detection
to oriented object detection On the basis of the characteristics of RS images and the current object detection models, we categorize the main challenges involved in oriented object
detection into four main parts: feature misalignment, spatial misalignment, OBB regression
problems, and common issues encountered in RS.
(2) A thorough taxonomy of the existing oriented object detection methods To help
researchers gain a deeper understanding of the key features of oriented object detection
methods, we categorize and summarize the existing oriented object detection methods
according to detection frameworks, OBB regression techniques, feature representation
approaches, and solutions to common issues.
(3) A comprehensive comparison among the state-of-the-art methods We provide a comprehensive comparison among the state-of-the-art methods on typical datasets, along with
an in-depth analysis of the advantages and disatvantages of these methods. This analysis
aims to offer valuable insights into the efficacy and applicability of these methods in terms
of addressing the main challenges associated with oriented object detection.
(4) Overview of the open issues and future research directions We thoroughly examine
several essential issues, shedding light on potential directions for future research, i.e., lightweight methods, scenario-specific datasets, multimodal datasets, and large-scale datasets, as
well as multimodal large models.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. We first introduce the development
trend from horizontal object detection to oriented object detection and highlight the major
related challenges in Sect. 2. We review the existing deep neural network (DNN)-based
detection frameworks in Sect. 3. Furthermore, we discuss the OBB regression techniques
and feature representation approaches in Sects. 4 and 5, respectively. In addition, we summarize the solutions to other common issues encountered in RS scenarios in Sect. 6. After
an overview of the commonly used datasets is provided in Sect. 7, we analyze and compare
the state-of-the-art methods in Sect. 8. Finally, we conclude our work and discuss future
directions for oriented object detection research in Sect. 9.

2 From horizontal object detection to oriented object detection
The early object detection methods relied on handcrafted descriptors (Lowe 2004; Dalal
and Triggs 2005; Fei-Fei and Perona 2005; Wright et al. 2009) and machine learning algorithms (Cortes and Vapnik 1995; Blaschke 2010; Leitloff et al. 2010; Blaschke et al. 2014).
These methods often have limited performance because of their weak feature representa-

13

350

Page 6 of 61

K. Wang et al.

tions. Although such approaches lag far behind deep learning methods in terms of accuracy, their instructive insights still have profound impacts on modern detectors, e.g., sliding
windows (Viola and Jones 2001, 2004), hard negative mining, and bounding box regression (Felzenszwalb et al. 2008, 2010). Readers interested in these early object detection
methods are referred to a recent survey (Cheng and Han 2016) that provided an in-depth
analysis of the classic RS object detection methods.
The world has witnessed impressive progress in computer vision with the advances
achieved in deep neural networks (DNNs) since 2012 (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006;
LeCun et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2018; He et al. 2016; Krizhevsky et al. 2012, 2017). Owing
to the persistent increases in computing resources, DNNs can learn high-level patterns from
large-scale datasets in an end-to-end manner. The pioneering studies bring a little glimmer
to the object detection field, especially because the performance of handcrafted-featurebased detectors reached a plateau after 2010. Since then, a growing number of DNN-based
detectors have emerged and have dominated the state-of-the-art methods due to their powerful feature representation capabilities.
The early research in the deep learning era was primarily concerned with designing horizontal object detectors (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015, 2017; Liu et al.
2016; Lin et al. 2017, 2020; Redmon et al. 2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2017; Hei and Jia
2020; Duan et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019) for natural scene images taken
from a horizontal perspective. Naturally, as horizontal object detectors rapidly evolve, e.g.,
the region-based convolutional neural network (RCNN) series (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015, 2017), You Only Look Once (YOLO) series (Redmon et al.
2016; Redmon and Farhadi 2017), and RetinaNet (Lin et al. 2017, 2020), numerous studies are harnessing their immense potential in RS scenarios. A growing number of efforts
have focused on refining network structures and crafting innovative data augmentation
techniques, all of which have been aimed at addressing the core challenges encountered
in RS object detection scenarios, including scale variations (Liang et al. 2020; Ye et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2022; Khan et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2025), complex backgrounds (Lu et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2022; Ma et al. 2022; Zhou et al. 2023), and weak
feature responses (Tian et al. 2022; Wu et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2024).
Nevertheless, RS images are typically captured from a BEV, leading to objects appearing with arbitrary orientations. Hence, directly applying horizontal object detectors to RS
images may lead to the following problems. (1) The intersection-over-union (IoU) between
one HBB and the adjacent HBBs can be very large in densely arranged scenarios, especially for objects with extremely large aspect ratios, as illustrated in Fig. 1b. Thus, the
nonmaximum suppression (NMS) technique tends to result in missed detections. (2) HBBs
are inclined to contain background areas, whereas OBBs can tightly enclose objects, thereby
achieving more precise localization effects, as shown in Fig. 1a. Given the above predicament concerning HBBs, OBBs are considered more appropriate for RS object detection
tasks.
With the remarkable development of detection frameworks (Ren et al. 2015, 2017; Lin
et al. 2017, 2020; Redmon et al. 2016; Carion et al. 2020), backbone networks (He et al.
2016; Liu et al. 2021), and robust feature representations (Liu et al. 2022; Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021), the field of object detection has achieved dramatic breakthroughs. Naturally, an
intuitive strategy for designing oriented object detectors is to modify the representative horizontal object detectors by predicting additional parameters to represent OBBs (Zhou et al.

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 7 of 61

350

2022). However, such a straightforward strategy is plagued by several additional challenges,
including feature misalignment, spatial misalignment, and OBB regression problems.
(1) Feature misalignment The prevailing generic object detectors typically contain a feature extraction network followed by a detection head, where the latter leverages the feature
representations generated by the former to make decisions. However, these feature representations are generally extracted via axis-aligned convolutions, thereby exposing nonnegligible misalignment issues w.r.t. the oriented objects, as shown in Fig. 3a. This type of
misaligned feature representations degrades the performance of oriented object detectors
because of their lack of rotational information, making the detectors struggle to identify
objects and regress precise OBBs.
(2) Spatial misalignment In addition to feature misalignment, the widely used anchorbased detection methods also struggle with spatial misalignment. Generic anchor-based
detectors typically use horizontal anchors as priors, thereby having limited IoUs with oriented objects, especially for objects with extremely large aspect ratios, as shown in Fig. 4a.
This poses a significant challenge to generic label assignment strategies (Ren et al. 2015,
2017), which assign positive or negative samples depending on their IoUs. Thus, the naïve
anchor generation mechanism is likely unable to provide sufficient positive samples during
the training process.
(3) OBB regression problems The current detectors commonly use the regression paradigm to represent the locations of objects, which has been proven to be an effective approach
and has yielded dramatic achievements. The most commonly used representation methods
for OBBs include θ-based and quadrilateral representations. However, the former suffers
from the periodicity of angles (PoA), causing angular boundary discontinuities (Yang et al.
2021, 2022; Qian et al. 2021, 2022). Specifically, a small angle difference may cause a large
loss change when the angular value approaches the angular boundary range. On the other

Fig. 3 Illustration of feature misalignment and feature alignment. a The misalignment between oriented
objects and the axis-aligned feature representations of anchor. b A example of feature alignment proposed
by R3 Det (Yang et al. 2021), which align the feature representations by integrating the features according to the five refined points of the predicted obb. The red, green, and blue boxes represent the ground
truth (GT), anchor, and predicted obb, respectively. The blue and yellow points denote anchor points and
refined feature points, respectively. The blue and yellow arrows denote feature interpolation and feature
alignment operation, respectively

13

350

Page 8 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Fig. 4 Illustration of spatial misalignment. a The IoU between horizontal anchor and oriented object is
very small, causing spatial misalignment. b, c Calculating the IoU between either horizontal anchor and
horizontal bounding rectangle of object, or rotated anchor and oriented object, can alleviate the spatial
misalignment. The red and green boxes represent the GT and anchor, respectively

hand, the latter faces challenges related to vertex ordering because an inappropriate vertex
sorting process may cause inconsistencies between the vertex sequences of the predicted
OBB and the ground truth (GT). Overall, both the PoA and vertex ordering problems can
seriously confuse the networks, leading to training instability. For more details, please refer
to Sects. A and B of the Appendix.
To address the above dilemmas, various works have been conducted and have achieved
notable advancements. Several methods construct well-designed detection frameworks by
devising rotated proposal generation networks (Sect. 3.1) or refined heads (Sect. 3.2) to
remedy feature misalignment. To address spatial misalignment, researchers have focused
on improving their assignment schemes (Sect. 3.1) and adopting anchor-free mechanisms
(Sect. 3.3). For OBB regression problems, several efforts have been made to design effective OBB regression technologies through the development of new loss functions (Sect. 4.1)
and OBB representation schemes (Sect. 4.2). In addition, high-quality feature representations are crucial for performing object detection; hence, much effort is concentrated on
designing networks to produce better feature representations, including rotation-invariant
feature representations (Sect. 5.1) and advanced feature representations (Sect. 5.2). We also
cover the solutions for addressing several common issues (Sect. 6) encountered in RS scenarios. Figure 5 shows the taxonomy of the oriented object detection methods examined in
this survey.

3 Detection frameworks
Object detection methods can be categorized into two primary groups: two-stage and onestage detection (Liu et al. 2020; Zou et al. 2023). The former work in a coarse-to-fine
paradigm, whereas the latter accomplish classification and regression in one step, thereby
exhibiting high efficiency but poor accuracy. In contrast with the aforementioned two categories, which rely on anchor mechanisms, anchor-free methods directly detect objects
without the need for predefined anchors. In addition, a series of DETR-based methods have
recently emerged; such methods regard the detection process as a set prediction task, thereby
effectively eliminating several handcrafted components, e.g., NMS and anchor mechanisms.
Considering that each category has advantages and disadvantages, we divide the representa-

13

Fig. 5 Structured taxonomy of the deep learning based oriented object detection methods in this survey

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…
Page 9 of 61
350

13

350

Page 10 of 61

K. Wang et al.

tive oriented object detectors into four categories: two-stage, one-stage, anchor-free, and
DETR-based. Several key methods are presented in Fig. 6. Next, we concisely review how
each category addresses the feature misalignment and spatial misalignment via deliberate
framework designs.

3.1 Two-stage detectors
Among the numerous prominent two-stage detectors (Ren et al. 2015, 2017; Lin et al. 2017;
Cai and Vasconcelos 2018; He et al. 2020; Qiao et al. 2021), the Faster RCNN (Ren et al.
2015, 2017) armed with feature pyramid networks (FPN) (Lin et al. 2017) is commonly
used as a benchmark owing to its exceptional accuracy and efficient design. As depicted
in Fig. 7a, its workflow consists of the following pipeline: a feature extraction module, a
region proposal network (RPN), and an RCNN. In the first stage, a sparse set of high-quality
region proposals that can potentially contain objects is generated via the RPN (Chavali et al.
2016; Hosang et al. 2016). During the second stage, the region features of each proposal are
extracted and then used for classification and refined regression processes via the RCNN.
Finally, several post-processing operations, such as NMS, are leveraged to finalize the
detection results (omitted in Fig. 7a). The oriented version of this method, termed Rotated
Faster RCNN or Faster RCNN OBB, predicts the orientation of each object by adding an
extra channel in its regression branch.
However, the naïve RPN only generates horizontal region proposals as regions of interest (RoIs), as shown in Fig. 8a. Apart from the feature misalignment caused by axis-aligned
convolutions, another factor that may impair the performance is the feature misalignment
between the horizontal RoI (HRoI) and the OBB, as shown in Fig. 9a. The feature misalignment significantly harms the feature representations, making the utilized detector struggle to
identify objects and regress precise OBBs yet inspiring successive innovations.
To cope with feature misalignment, various efforts have been dedicated to generating
rotated proposals and then adopting rotated RoI (RRoI) operators to extract spatially aligned
features, as shown in Fig. 9b. The RRPN (Ma et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018; Zhang et al.
2018) incorporates rotated anchors to accommodate objects with various orientations. In
addition to scales and aspect ratios, different orientation parameters can be added to further
generate additional rotated anchors, as shown in Fig. 8b. This method can alleviate spatial
misalignment (as shown in Fig. 4c), thereby achieving better performance in terms of recall.
However, redundant rotated anchors lead to significantly increased computational costs and
memory footprints.
To reduce the number of rotated anchors, the RoI Transformer (Ding et al. 2019) retains
the naïve RPN structure to alleviate spatial misalignment (as shown in Fig. 4b) and then
introduces a lightweight RoI learner module. As shown in Fig. 8c, the RRoI learner converts
HRoIs directly into RRoIs, generating precise RRoIs without enormous numbers of rotated
anchors, thus increasing the efficiency and accuracy. However, the added complexity of the
RoI learner, which includes an extra RoI operator and a regression stage, makes the network
less efficient.
Consequently, Xie et al. (2021) designed a simpler structure, Oriented RCNN, to directly
generate high-quality RRoIs from horizontal anchors, as shown in Fig. 8d. This lightweight
module benefits from the proposed midpoint offset representation, which includes the corresponding external HBB and the offsets of vertices w.r.t. the midpoints of the external

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 11 of 61

350

Fig. 6 Chronological overview of the representative oriented object detection frameworks

Fig. 7 The basic architecture of two-stage and one-stage detectors. a Two-stage detectors first utilize RPN
to predict a set of proposals, then extract corresponding region features for classification and refined regression. b One-stage detectors predict the class probabilities and locations for each spatial location. Most
of them add a refined stage to alleviate the feature misalignment. The blue arrows denote the workflow of
RetinaNet (Lin et al. 2017, 2020), while the orange arrows denote the workflow of refined stage

Fig. 8 The comparisons of different strategies for proposal generation. a RPN only generates horizontal
proposals (Ren et al. 2015, 2017). b RRPN densely places rotated anchors with different scales, ratios,
and angles (Ma et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). c RoI Transformer generates rotated proposal from horizontal RoI via RPN, RoI Alignment, and OBB regression (Ding et al. 2019). d Oriented
RCNN can generate high-quality rotated proposals using a lightweight module (Xie et al. 2021)

13

350

Page 12 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Fig. 9 Illustration of feature misalignment in two-stage detectors. a The feature misalignment between
oriented object and horizontal region proposal. b Detectors can extract aligned features from rotated
region proposal

HBB. This representation scheme maintains horizontal regression mechanisms, ensuring a
more stable training process relative to regressing OBBs from horizontal anchors. Benefiting from the design of the oriented RPN and midpoint offset representation, the Oriented
RCNN can achieve competitive accuracy w.r.t. advanced two-stage detectors and reach
approximate efficiency in comparison with one-stage detectors.
The excellent designs of the RoI Transformer and Oriented RCNN address the spatial
misalignment and feature misalignment faced by two-stage detectors, laying the foundation
for subsequent research in this field. Numerous two-stage detectors have since adopted the
RoI Transformer or Oriented RCNN as their baseline framework, harnessing exceptional
feature representations (e.g., ReDet (Han et al. 2021), RVSA (Wang et al. 2022), ARC (Pu
et al. 2023), and STD (Yu et al. 2024)) or crafting superior OBB representations (e.g., Gliding Vertex (Xu et al. 2021), RPGAOD (Qiao et al. 2023), and QPDet (Yao et al. 2023)) and
loss functions (e.g., FRIoU (Qian et al. 2023), CGCDet (Wang et al. 2024), and GCL (Ming
et al. 2024)) to increase their performance. These methods will be discussed in detail in the
subsequent section.

3.2 One-stage detectors
As illustrated in Fig. 7b, one-stage detectors first extract multilevel feature maps and then
predict the class probabilities and locations for each anchor per spatial location. Owing to
the absence of RPN and RoI operators, one-stage detectors encounter more severe feature
misalignment than two-stage detectors do. Thus, a series of one-stage algorithms, such as
R3 Det (Yang et al. 2021) and S2A-Net (Han et al. 2022), have been developed to alleviate
this dilemma.
R3 Det (Yang et al. 2021) adopts a feature refinement module (FRM) to align features.
First, R3 Det transforms its horizontal anchors into rotated anchors, which can provide more
accurate positional and oriented information. Then, the FRM employs pixelwise feature
interpolation to integrate features derived from the five locations (i.e., one center and four
corners) of the corresponding refined rotated anchors, as shown in Fig. 3b. Similarly, S2

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 13 of 61

350

A-Net (Han et al. 2022) aligns features via alignment convolution (AlignConv), which is a
variant of deformable convolution (Dai et al. 2017). The offset field of AlignConv is inferred
from the guidance of rotated anchors. Both the FRM and AlignConv operate in a coarseto-fine manner but differ significantly from the RRoI operator. Notably, they follow a full
convolution structure with fewer sampling points, resulting in increased efficiency.
Based on S2A-Net, CFL (Sun et al. 2024) introduces a spatial transform selection (STS)
strategy and a critical feature sampling (CFS) module. STS dynamically assigns labels by
calculating IoU thresholds on the basis of aspect ratios, angle differences, and the initial
IoU threshold determined by ATSS (Zhang et al. 2020). The adaptable IoU threshold controls the number of samples assigned to easy objects while ensuring that sufficient positive
samples are provided for hard objects with large aspect ratios and angle differences. CFS
incorporates a deformable convolution in which the sampling positions are derived from the
initial detection results (center point, vertices, and midpoints) combined with a learnable
offset field.
Both R3 Det and S2A-Net utilize an extra refined head for feature alignment, making
them popular baseline choices as one-stage detectors. These methods further solve the spatial misalignment and OBB regression problems via innovative sample assignment strategies (e.g., DAL (Ming et al. 2021) and DCFL (Xu et al. 2023)) or regression losses (e.g.,
DCL (Yang et al. 2021), FoRDet (Zhang et al. 2022), GWD (Yang et al. 2021), KLD (Yang
et al. 2021), and PSC (Yu and Da 2023, 2024)). In the following section, we provide a
detailed introduction to these methods.

3.3 Anchor-free detectors
The above two categories follow the anchor paradigm, which suffers from spatial misalignment between horizontal anchors and OBBs. To address the above issues, numerous anchorfree methods have been developed to detect objects without relying on preset anchors. These
methods eliminate anchor-related hyperparameters, showing potential for generalization to
wide-ranging applications (Zhang et al. 2020). According to their representations of OBBs,
anchor-free methods can be divided into keypoint-based methods and center-based methods.
Keypoint-based methods first locate a set of adaptive or self-constrained keypoints and
then circumscribe the spatial extent of an object, as shown in Fig. 10a. For example, O2
-DNet (Wei et al. 2020) first locates the midpoints of four sides of the OBB by regressing
the offsets from the center point. The two sets of opposite midpoints are subsequently connected to form two mutually perpendicular midlines, which are decoded to represent the
OBB. In addition, a self-supervision loss constrains the perpendicular relationship between
two middle lines and the collinear relationship between the center point and the two opposite midpoints. Following RepPoints (Yang et al. 2019), CFA (Guo et al. 2021, 2022) uses
deformable convolution (Dai et al. 2017) to generate a convex hull for each oriented object.
The convex hull, which is represented by irregular sample points, is refined using a convex
IoU (CIoU) loss. To alleviate the feature aliasing problem between densely packed objects,
convex hull set splitting and feature antialiasing strategies are designed to refine the convex
hulls and adaptively optimize the feature assignment process.
Furthermore, to predict high-quality oriented reppoints, Oriented RepPoints (Li et al.
2022) employs an adaptive point assessment and assignment (APAA) scheme to measure
the quality of the reppoints. The APAA process assesses reppoints across four dimensions

13

350

Page 14 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Fig. 10 The basic architecture of keypoint-based and center-based anchor-free detectors

(classification, localization, orientation alignment, and pointwise correlation) to select
high-quality points without imposing an additional computational burden during inference.
Subsequently, Yu et al. (2023) proposed a dynamic information aggregation (DIA) module
based on a multihead self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017). By mining the relationships between reppoints, DIA not only helps obtain more accurate reppoint positions but
also enriches the feature representations, thereby further increasing the model localization
accuracy.
Center-based methods typically generate multiple probabilistic heatmaps and a series of
feature maps. As shown in Fig. 10b, the heatmaps provide a set of candidates (peak points)
as coarse center points, whereas the feature maps regress the transformation parameters to
represent the OBB. Currently, most center-based methods, including CHPDet (Zhang et al.
2022), GGHL (Huang et al. 2022), and DHRec (Nie and Huang 2023), are dedicated to
designing a variety of OBB representations for addressing PoA problems. However, these
methods typically follow one-stage paradigms and tend to predict coarse locations due to
feature misalignment, whereas the state-of-the-art methods generally involve one or multiple refined stages to improve their performance.
Hence, an effective scheme for increasing the performance of such an approach is to
leverage anchor-free methods to generate coarse detection results that are then refined via
a subsequent feature alignment stage, e.g., AOPG (Cheng et al. 2022), DEA (Liang et al.
2022), DRDet (Zhang et al. 2023), and TS-Conv (Huang et al. 2024). AOPG (Cheng et al.
2022) initially produces coarse oriented boxes via the rotated FCOS approach (Tian et al.
2019), subsequently refining them into high-quality oriented proposals. DEA (Liang et al.
2022) leverages two parallel branches, which separately generate proposals using anchorfree and anchor-based approaches, followed by an interactive sample screening procedure
to select high-quality training samples.
In contrast with the above two methods, which capitalize on the merits of anchor-free
techniques to mitigate spatial misalignment and facilitate an appropriate sample assignment
process, DRDet (Zhang et al. 2023) and TS-Conv (Huang et al. 2024) concentrate on feature
refinement. DRDet (Zhang et al. 2023) adopts two perpendicular rotated lines to represent
the OBB. Then, an orientation-guided feature encoder (OFD) is employed to encode the
orientation-aware information into refined features along each rotated line. Compared with
rectangular features, the line features extracted from the OFD can introduce less noise and
alleviate the feature aliasing issue caused by overlapping objects. TS-Conv (Huang et al.
2024) utilizes different sampling offsets for localization and classification to alleviate the

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 15 of 61

350

task misalignment problem (i.e., localization and classification tasks may focus on different
feature regions (Song et al. 2020)). The sampling offsets are restricted by the initial OBBs
predicted in an anchor-free manner, allowing for dynamic adaptations to objects with various shapes.

3.4 DETR-based detectors
In addition to the above convolution-based methods, DETR-based detectors, including
DETR (Carion et al. 2020) and its variants (Zhu et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2021; Gao et al.
2021), have exhibited great potential and achieved state-of-the-art performance in the detection community. On the basis of DETR (Carion et al. 2020), O2 DETR (Ma et al. 2021) was
proposed to utilize a transformer for completing oriented object detection tasks. In addition,
depthwise separable convolutions (Sifre and Mallat 2013; Chollet 2017; Haase and Amthor
2020) were introduced to replace the computationally complex self-attention mechanism,
making networks more lightweight and speeding up their training processes. To address
feature misalignment, Dai et al. (2022) proposed AO2-DETR by improving the deformable
DETR (Zhu et al. 2021); they designed an oriented proposal generation mechanism and an
adaptive oriented proposal refinement (OPR) module for aligning the features. Recently,
several improved DETR-based detectors have been proposed for generic object detection
tasks, e.g., DN-DETR (Li et al. 2022), DAB-DETR (Liu et al. 2022), and DINO (Zhang
et al. 2022), resulting in dramatic breakthroughs in terms of accuracy and convergence
speed. ARS-DETR (Zeng et al. 2024) attempts to exploit DINO (Zhang et al. 2022) in
oriented object detection tasks. Compared with other advanced oriented object detectors,
it achieves greater detection accuracy in terms of a more rigorous metric (i.e., AP75 ), but
it lags w.r.t. the standard metric (i.e., AP50 ). Moreover, the long training convergence time
and heavy computational cost of this method are still open problems.

3.5 Discussion
Feature misalignment and spatial misalignment severely impair the performance of oriented object detection methods. To address these issues, substantial research has contributed
to modifying the current detection frameworks. The existing two-stage detectors typically
employ efficient and precisely oriented proposal generation modules, leveraging RRoI
operators to extract rotated aligned features. Similarly, one-stage detectors are inclined to
incorporate an extra refined stage for feature alignment. Thus, the above two schemes can
empower detectors to mine rotation-related information, thereby enhancing the semantic
representations of oriented objects.
Nevertheless, spatial misalignment remains a persistent issue. Anchor-free detectors
address this problem by eliminating the anchor mechanism and, in advanced methods,
incorporating extra feature refinement stages to further mitigate feature misalignment.
In addition, DETR-based methods provide a new detection paradigm and have received
widespread attention. However, the exploration of DETR-based methods in oriented object
detection is not sufficiently comprehensive, and further research is needed to accelerate the
convergence of the training process and reduce the computational overhead.
Well-designed detection frameworks are conducive to alleviating feature and spatial
misalignment but fail to address PoA problem. In addition, the extracted features are not

13

350

Page 16 of 61

K. Wang et al.

equipped with rotation invariance, as the convolution operators are axis-aligned. To overcome these dilemmas, suitable OBB regression techniques and powerful feature representations of oriented objects have also been widely studied since they can be seamlessly
integrated into various detection frameworks. Next, we discuss the OBB regression techniques and feature representation approaches.

4 OBB regression technologies
Oriented object detectors typically locate objects through regression. Specifically, a customized regression head predicts the orientation parameters when the most frequent θ-based
representation is used. Unfortunately, such a regression paradigm suffers from several limitations, including metric-loss inconsistency and angular boundary discontinuities. For more
details about the above issues, please refer to Sect. A of the Appendix or the corresponding
papers (Qian et al. 2021, 2022; Yang et al. 2021, 2022; Xu et al. 2021). To address these
issues, the existing oriented object detection methods usually develop novel loss functions or alternative representations for OBBs. Several representative methods are shown in
Fig. 11. Next, we briefly introduce them and discuss their advantages and disadvantages.

4.1 Regression loss
(1) Metric-loss inconsistency Metric-loss inconsistency generally imply that the optimal
choice for the regression task may not guarantee high localization accuracy in terms of
the IoU. To bridge this gap, the existing generic object detectors generally introduce IoUinduced loss functions, such as the GIoU (Rezatofighi et al. 2019) and DIoU (Zheng et al.
2020). However, these IoU-induced losses cannot be incorporated directly into oriented
object detection because of the nondifferentiable nature of the RIoU (Yang et al. 2021). Thus,
several differentiable functions have been designed to approximate the RIoU loss (Yang
et al. 2019, 2021, 2022). The PIoU (Chen et al. 2020) introduces a differentiable kernel
function that accumulates the contributions of interior overlapping pixels to approximate
their intersection area. Several solutions (Yang et al. 2019, 2022, 2021) integrate the RIoU
as a loss weight of the regression loss:
LRIoU =

Lreg
· |g(RIoU )|(1)
|Lreg |

Fig. 11 Chronological overview of oriented object detection methods for addressing OBB regression
problems

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 17 of 61

350

Lreg denotes the commonly used smooth L1 loss (Ren et al. 2015, 2017). g(·) is a loss function related to the RIoU, e.g., −log(·). This loss is composed of a normalized regression
L
loss |Lreg
for controlling the direction of gradient propagation and a scalar g(RIoU) for
reg |

adjusting the gradient magnitude. When the RIoU is close to 1, g(RIoU ) ≈ 0, and Lreg is
approximately equal to 0, effectively mitigating metric-loss inconsistency.
In addition to designing a regression loss for approaching the RIoU, Ming et al. (2024)
analyzed the gradient of the RIoU loss and proposed a gradient calibration loss (GCL).
The GCL constructs a corrected gradient w.r.t. the RIoU, angular error, and scale and then
calculates the optimized regression loss through integration. Despite these efforts, angle
regression still faces challenges, particularly the PoA problem.
(2) Angular boundary discontinuities Owing to the PoA problem, the regression loss
sharply increases when the angle approaches its boundary or the aspect ratio approaches 1,
which seriously confuses the utilized network and causes training instability. Thus, several
methods have been proposed to address these issues, and they can be divided into three
types.
Modulated rotated loss (Qian et al. 2021, 2022). The modulated rotated loss adds an
extra loss item based on the naïve regression loss to eliminate angular boundary discontinuities. Specifically, it first transforms the original predicted OBB bp = (xp , yp , wp , hp , θp ) to
′
another form bp = (xp , yp , hp , wp , θp − π2 ),1 and then it takes the minimum of their regres{
}
′
sion loss, i.e., min Lreg (bp , bg ), Lreg (bp , bg ) , where bg denotes the corresponding GT.
This scheme can adaptively choose the appropriate representation for the predicted OBB
that results in the smallest loss value, thereby mitigating the sudden loss increases near angular boundaries. However, this approach does not fully resolve the metric-loss inconsistency.
Angle coder (Yang and Yan 2020; Yang et al. 2021; Yu and Da 2023, 2024). The circular
smooth label (CSL) approach discretizes angles into intervals and predicts a discrete angle
via classification (Yang and Yan 2020). In addition, to increase its tolerance to error concerning the adjacent angles and to handle the PoA problem, CSL uses a window function for
angle label smoothing. Although CSL eliminates boundary discontinuities, its heavy prediction layer harms its efficiency. To address these issues, Yang et al. (2021) further adopted
densely coded labels (DCLs) to reduce the code length. Furthermore, Wang et al. (2022)
analyzed the limitations of CSL when continuous focal loss functions (Lin et al. 2017, 2020)
were directly applied to the soft labels of an angle classification task. Specifically, when
the label y ̸= 1, the extreme point of the derivative of the focal loss function FL(x) is not at
x = y , yielding an inaccurate angle prediction. Thus, Gaussian focal-CSL (GF-CSL) was
designed to obtain more accurate angle predictions with higher responses at the peaks by
implementing adaptive Gaussian attenuation on the negative angle categories. However,
the hyperparameters of these methods have significant effects on their performance. Even
worse, the optimal settings for different datasets also differ, thereby requiring laborious tuning processes.
To solve this problem, Yu and Da (2023, 2024) designed a differentiable angle coder
named the phase-shifting encoder (PSC). The PSC encodes the angle into a periodic phase
to solve the boundary discontinuity problem. Moreover, an advanced version, PSCD, maps
angles to phases with different frequencies to further solve the square-like problem.
1

Notably, the modulated rotated loss is customized for representing OBBs under the OpenCV definition,
which is an intractable problem to the exchangeability of edges and the PoA.

13

350

Page 18 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Gaussian distribution-based methods (Yang et al. 2021, 2022, 2021, 2022). Gaussian
distribution-based methods provide unified and elegant solutions to the boundary discontinuities and the square-like problem. First, the OBB representation b = (x, y, w, h, θ) is
converted to a 2-D Gaussian distribution representation N (m, Σ), where m = (x, y) and Σ
is a matrix associated with w, h, θ:
1

Σ2 =

[ w

h
2
2
2 cos θ + 2 sin θ
w−h
2 cos θ sin θ

w−h
2 cos θ sin θ
h
w
2
2
2 cos θ + 2 sin θ

]
(2)

A distance function is subsequently used to measure two Gaussian distributions, such as the
Gaussian Wasserstein distance (GWD) (Yang et al. 2021) or the Kullback–Leibler divergence (KLD) (Yang et al. 2021). Furthermore, the measure is converted into an approximate IoU loss by using a nonlinear transformation to achieve metric-loss consistency. The
merit of the Gaussian distribution is that the angle is encoded by a trigonometric function
and is thereby not constrained by the PoA problem. Moreover, the OBB parameters are
jointly optimized in a dynamic manner so that they can influence each other during training.
Despite their advantages, both the GWD and KLD maintain only value-level rather than
trend-level metric-loss consistency. To achieve better trend-level alignment, the KFIoU loss
was proposed; this approach is differentiable and does not require additional hyperparameters. The KFIoU can calculate the overlapping area between two Gaussian distributions,
resulting in improved performance relative to that of the GWD and KLD.

4.2 OBB representations
The most straightforward approach for handling angular boundary discontinuities is to
design a novel OBB representation. One common scheme exploits new parameters to redefine the OBB, e.g., quadrilateral representation (Xu et al. 2021) and DHRec (Nie and Huang
2023). The quadrilateral representation adopts the coordinates of four vertices to represent
an OBB but suffers from inconsistency when conducting vertex sorting2 between the predictions and the GT, as shown in Fig. 12a. RSDet (Qian et al. 2021, 2022) mitigates this problem by introducing a modulated loss that considers different vertex orderings, minimizing
the regression loss across these variations. Furthermore, Xu et al. (2021) proposed an effective way to glide the vertex of a horizontal anchor on each corresponding side, as shown
in Fig. 12b. Specifically, it regresses four length ratios representing the gliding offset on
each corresponding side, eliminating the confusion caused by vertex sorting. To remedy the
confusion encountered in cases with nearly horizontal objects, it directly selects horizontal
detection guided by the predicted obliquity factor, albeit with slightly imprecise regression
results. DHRec (Nie and Huang 2023) encodes the OBB using double HBBs derived from
the sorted horizontal and vertical coordinates, as shown in Fig. 12c. Hence, such a method
allows any horizontal object detector to be harnessed to predict OBBs.
In addition, several anchor-free methods utilize keypoints to denote an OBB, which can
provide rich semantic features for oriented objects. Following RepPoints (Yang et al. 2019),
CFA (Guo et al. 2021, 2022) and Oriented RepPoints (Li et al. 2022) utilize deformable convolution (Dai et al. 2017) to generate a group of reppoints, as shown in Fig. 12d. A minimum
bounding rectangle is then computed for each set of predicted reppoints to yield detection
2

For more details, please refer to Sect. B of the Appendix.

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 19 of 61

350

Fig. 12 Comparison of different OBB representation methods. The red dots and parameters denote corresponding OBB parameters

results. OSKDet (Lu et al. 2022) encodes 8 ordered points (4 vertices and 4 midpoints) to
represent an OBB because the object has more obvious features in its vertex and edge areas,
as shown in Fig. 12e. Furthermore, an orientation-sensitive heatmap was designed to better
fit object shapes, allowing the utilized model to implicitly learn orientations and shapes.
Although angular discontinuities have been eliminated, the redesigned OBB representation still have limitations. The quadrilateral representation is irregular, and DHRec adds
extra position and oblique factors to ensure the uniqueness of the produced OBB representation. Moreover, the keypoints rely on a complicated post-processing operator to generate
a rectangular box.
Therefore, another approach for OBB representation only uses some extra parameters to
determine the orientations of objects. The classic midpoint offset representation (Xie et al.
2021) infers orientations via midpoint offsets, as shown in Fig. 12f, but it typically produces
parallelograms that require regularization. On the basis of the midpoint offset representation, Qiao et al. (2023) analyzed the geometric relationship between an OBB and its external
HBB to derive the height directly from the width and two offsets, using only five parameters
to generate a high-quality OBB directly from the horizontal anchors. QPDet (Yao et al.
2023) adopts two symmetrical offsets w.r.t. the quadrant points to account for the rotation
and aspect ratio, and a single parameter (radius r) controls the scale, as shown in Fig. 12g.
CHPDet (Zhang et al. 2022) defines a head point to indicate the correct orientation but
requires proper annotations that specify the direction of the object head within the range
of 2π , as shown in Fig. 12h. These orientation representation can discard angle regression,
thus naturally eliminating angular boundary discontinuities. Additionally, the advantages
and disadvantages of the above OBB representation methods are summarized in Table 2.

13

350

Page 20 of 61

K. Wang et al.

4.3 Discussion
As stated above, an enormous amount of research effort is committed to resolving the challenges encountered by OBB regression. Redesigning a novel regression loss for mainstream
θ-based representations empowers the detector to solve the metric-loss inconsistency problem and eliminate the confusion caused by the PoA, thereby enhancing the stability of the
network backpropagation process. In particular, Gaussian distribution-based methods draw
upon a trigonometric encoder and joint optimization to achieve strong performance. On the
other hand, novel OBB representation approaches can avoid performing orientation regression, in which completely redefined OBB representations commonly rely on complex postprocessing operations or extra constraints, whereas the orientation representations provide a
simple yet efficient way to determine the orientation. Nevertheless, only a handful of novel
OBB representation approaches consider the inconsistency problem.

Table 2 Comparison among different OBB representation methods
Methods
Advantages
Quadrilateral repre- This is a direct method that can compactly
sentation (Xia et al. enclose oriented objects with large degrees of
2018; Qian et al.
deformation and has been widely adopted to
2021, 2022)
annotate objects in large-scale RS datasets
Gliding Vertex (Xu This is a concise but effective method that can
et al. 2021)
eliminate vertex sorting
DHRec (Nie and
Huang 2023)
CFA and Oriented
RepPoints (Guo
et al. 2021, 2022;
Li et al. 2022)
OSKDet (Lu et al.
2022)

Disadvantages
It suffers from an inconsistent vertex sorting process, and can only
represent irregular quadrilaterals
(not rectangles)
It can only represent irregular
quadrilaterals (not rectangles). It
cannot accurately represent nearly
horizontal objects
It can directly use horizontal object detectors to It requires too many parameters
regress OBBs, thus freeing it from the trouble
to ensure the uniqueness of OBB
related to the PoA and vertex sorting problems representations
The adaptive point learning method can capture It requires complicated postthe geometric information of oriented objects
processing operations to convert
and avoid vertex sorting and the PoA problems reppoints into an OBB

The keypoints can capture the critical features
of vertex and edge areas, which can better match the object shape. The unordered
keypoint representation scheme can avoid the
confusion of vertex sorting
Midpoint OffThis is a concise yet effective OBB represet (Xie et al. 2021) sentation method that can eliminate the PoA
problem
QPDet (Yao et al.
This is a simple OBB representation method
2023)
that needs just five parameters; it can avoid the
generation of irregular bounding boxes
CHPDet (Zhang
This approach employs a head point to indicate
et al. 2022)
the direction, effectively eliminating the PoA
problem

13

It requires complicated postprocessing operations to convert
irregular keypoints into an OBB
It typically generates a parallelogram and requires a post-processing procedure for regularization
It suffers from a new PoA problem
between ∆α and ∆β when representing nearly horizontal objects
The accuracy of the orientation
depends on the precision of the
center point and the head point.
When either position is inaccurate,
it affects the overall precision of
the predicted location

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 21 of 61

350

5 Feature representation approaches
Robust and discriminative feature representations play pivotal roles in improving both
localization and classification tasks. As a result, the most recent improvements in detection accuracy have been attained via research conducted on enhancing feature representations through innovative network architectures. In this section, we review the effort devoted
to improving the feature representations of oriented objects, i.e., rotation-invariant feature
representations and advanced feature representations. Several key methods are shown in
Fig. 13.

5.1 Rotation-invariant feature representations
Rotation invariance is an essential problem when learning visual feature representations
for oriented objects (Lowe 2004; Han et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2024). The commonly used
approaches, including RRoI operators (Ma et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2019)
and random rotation data augmentation (Han et al. 2021), are suboptimal, as they can extract
only approximately rotation-invariant features (Lenc and Vedaldi 2015; Worrall et al. 2017).
Recently, the exploration of rotation-sensitive feature extraction networks has provided
new insights for the community; these methods utilize different channels to represent
feature information derived from different orientations, e.g., oriented response convolution (ORConv) (Zhou et al. 2017) and group-equivariant convolutional neural networks
(G-CNNs) (Cohen and Welling 2016; Worrall et al. 2017; Marcos et al. 2017; Weiler
and Cesa 2019; Weiler et al. 2018). Several methods, e.g., RRD (Liao et al. 2018), CHPDet (Zhang et al. 2022), and S2ANet (Han et al. 2022), replace ordinary convolution modules with ORConv to obtain orientation-dependent responses, which are then transformed
into rotation-invariant features using ORAlign and ORPooling. Additionally, ReDet (Han
et al. 2021) incorporates G-CNN into RoI Transformer (Ding et al. 2019) to generate rotation-equivariant features; then, a rotation-invariant RoI alignment operator is designed to
adaptively extract rotation-invariant features from the equivariant features according to the
predicted orientations. Furthermore, Li et al. (2024) introduced selective rotation of the
kernel (SRK) to enhance classification features. The SRK module rotates the convolution
kernel at different angles to extract rotation-invariant features, where the output channel
dimensionality of the corresponding rotated convolution kernel is adaptively obtained by
network learning.

Fig. 13 Chronological overview of feature representation approaches

13

350

Page 22 of 61

K. Wang et al.

In contrast with ORConv and G-CNNs, which extract features via static kernels with a
group of fixed orientations, ARC (Pu et al. 2023) dynamically rotates its convolution kernels according to the orientations of the objects, where these orientations are predicted in
a data-dependent manner. As a result, ARC can capture the rotation information of objects
with different orientations and boost the feature representations produced in oriented object
detection scenarios.
However, Wang et al. (2024) noted that the cyclic shift phenomena exhibited by the features acquired from a rotation-equivariant network are unstable due to dilation and pooling
operations. To maintain rotation invariance for features, a rotation-robust prototype generation (RPG) scheme was designed with a stabilization module and an enhancement module.
The former aggregates features with different orientations to generate a rotation-robust prototype, whereas the latter employs this prototype to enhance the original features in each
group.

5.2 Advanced feature representations
In addition to rotation-invariant networks, advanced feature extraction networks, particularly vision transformers (ViTs) (Vaswani et al. 2017; Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Liu et al.
2021), have played a crucial role in achieving high-precision detection. ConvNeXt (Liu
et al. 2022) is another notable architecture that has also contributed to the field, although the
corresponding discussion will be brief in this context.
Recently, ViTs have achieved significant success in computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al.
2021; Liu et al. 2021; Han et al. 2023), primarily because their self-attention mechanisms
capture global feature representations. This exceptional feature representation capacity has
led to the increasing adoption of ViTs in object detection tasks, yielding remarkable results.
Representative architectures such as the ViT series (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021;
Zhang et al. 2023) and the Swin transformer (Liu et al. 2021) can serve directly as backbone networks, exhibiting better feature representation capabilities than CNNs do. Furthermore, the unsupervised MAE-based (He et al. 2022) pretraining scheme has made notable
progress in terms of developing ViTs for object detection. Consequently, these powerful
ViT architectures contribute to establishing a solid foundation for delivering outstanding
achievements in oriented object detection tasks.
Nevertheless, their utilization in oriented object detection field is fairly unexplored; e.g.,
an essential problem is how to extract rotation-related features. Wang et al. (2022) addressed
this concern by designing a rotated variable-size window attention (RVSA) mechanism
based on a ViT, which adaptively generates locally oriented windows with different sizes,
locations, and angles. Although RVSA outperforms all the previously proposed methods, it
relies on a self-attention mechanism to create oriented windows without explicitly leveraging guidance information.
On the other hand, STD (Yu et al. 2024) adopts a controlled scheme for manipulating the
feature extraction process according to the decoupled OBB parameters, i.e., the center position, sizes, and angles. It follows a divide-and-conquer approach that estimates the position,
size, and angle parameters via separate network branches in different stages. Furthermore,
the cascaded activation masks created by the decoupled OBB parameters are integrated to
gradually enhance the features extracted by stacked transformer blocks. The progressive
refinement of feature representations enables STD to reach state-of-the-art performance,

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 23 of 61

350

achieving mean average precision (mAP) values of 82.24% and 98.55% on the DOTAV1.0 (Xia et al. 2018) and HRSC2016 (Liu et al. 2016) datasets, respectively.
More recently, ConvNeXt (Liu et al. 2022) gradually modified the standard ResNet
model according to a series of design decisions made by the Swin transformer (Liu et al.
2021) and demonstrated that pure CNNs outperform ViTs in terms of accuracy and robustness. Moreover, ConvNeXt can maintain the efficiency of standard CNNs, thus becoming
the dominant architecture in many applications.

5.3 Discussion
The investigation of feature representations can lead to improvements in the whole object
detection field. ORConv and G-CNNs empower the corresponding models to mine rotation-invariant features by using different channels to represent feature information derived
from different orientations, whereas advanced feature extraction networks are dedicated to
enhancing semantic representations via powerful and well-designed architectures. Although
the former is conducive to extracting rotation-invariant features in both the spatial and channel dimensions, they are built on conventional CNN modules that lag behind the latter. Thus,
it is crucial to validate the effectiveness of integrating rotation-invariant feature extraction
networks and advanced networks. We hope that further research efforts will explore more
powerful rotation-invariant and high-level semantic feature representations for performing
oriented object detection.

6 Solutions to common issues
In addition to the specific challenges associated with oriented object detection, several common issues still exist w.r.t. RS scenarios, e.g., complex backgrounds, scale variations, large
aspect ratios, and the lack of annotated samples, as shown in Fig. 14. Several representative
methods for tracking these common issues are shown in Fig. 15.

6.1 Complex backgrounds
Owing to their wide visual fields and complex earth surfaces, RS images typically contain a
variety of complex backgrounds, causing significant interference in detection tasks. Objects
are frequently surrounded by different backgrounds, necessitating detectors with heightened discriminative capabilities. In addition, the presence of backgrounds with textures and
shapes resembling the objects leads to a high false-positive rate.
To this end, a series of efforts have been made to suppress background noise and emphasize the valuable areas of objects. CFC-Net (Ming et al. 2022) and PETDet (Li et al. 2024)
both combine channel and spatial attention modules to learn the semantic correlation
between the foreground and background of the image. However, these methods rely on
self-attention mechanisms and lack direct foreground guidance. To enhance the ability to
discriminate the foreground, Zhang et al. (2022) proposed a foreground relation module
for obtaining foreground contextual representations under the supervision of the designed
foreground map. Similarly, CBDA-Net (Liu et al. 2022) builds two parallel spatial attention streams to capture center and boundary attention features, which can assist detectors in

13

350

Page 24 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Fig. 14 Illustration of common issues in RS scenarios (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022). a–c Examples
of complex backgrounds, scale variations, and large aspect ratio, respectively

Fig. 15 Chronological overview of oriented object detection methods for addressing common issues

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 25 of 61

350

improving their object localization accuracy. In addition, SCRDet (Yang et al. 2019) adopts
a pixel attention network to generate a saliency map that can separate the foreground from
the background and uses squeeze-and-excitation (SE) blocks (Hu et al. 2020) as its channel
attention network to further enhance the saliency map.
Building on SCRDet, SCRDet++ (Yang et al. 2022) introduces an instance-level denoising (InLD) module that weakens the feature response of the background region while
decoupling the features of different categories into their corresponding channels. Similar to
InLD, several methods (Zhang et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2023; Yao et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2024)
introduce semantic mask modules that are supervised by classwise masks transformed from
the oriented GT. These semantic mask modules separate the features of different categories
in the channel dimension, which can help the networks reduce both background interference
and interclass interference.

6.2 Scale variations
As the ground sampling distance (GSD) can range from a few centimeters to hundreds of
meters, the RS images taken by different sensors usually have large-scale variations. Additionally, even within the same category, object instances exhibit wide-ranging sizes. These
interclass and intraclass scale variations pose additional challenges. In particular, the most
critical challenge concerns small objects because of their insufficient feature information,
inaccurate localization effects, and inadequate positive samples (Cheng et al. 2023). Worse
still, the task concerning oriented objects becomes more difficult because of the extra orientation regression process and limited overlaps with anchor boxes.
In recent years, many effective strategies have been developed to increase the robustness
and adaptability of detectors to objects with various scales; these approaches can be classified into two categories: network-level methods and data-level methods. Network-level
methods develop novel network structures for multiscale feature extraction, e.g., feature
pyramid architectures (Lin et al. 2017) and their variants (Tian et al. 2024), as well as
multibranch architectures (Li et al. 2019; Pan et al. 2020; Cai et al. 2024). Pan et al. (2020)
designed a feature selection module to adjust receptive fields; they proposed a channel
attention network to adaptively fuse the features extracted by using kernels with various
sizes, aspect ratios, and orientations. PKINet (Cai et al. 2024) employs parallel multiscale
convolution kernels without dilation to effectively capture features across various receptive
fields. On the other hand, data-level methods strive to design data augmentation strategies
that are independent of the applied network architectures and can be generalized to any
detector. Multiscale training and testing is a useful data augmentation approach that scales
input images at different resolutions (Singh and Davis 2018; Singh et al. 2018) and has
been shown to reduce overfitting and improve generalizability (Ren et al. 2015, 2017; Russakovsky et al. 2015). However, this approach inevitably leads to poor temporal efficiency.
In addition to enhancing semantic representations or amplifying object sizes, several
optimal assignment strategies have emerged to enable adequate sample assignments for
small oriented objects. Anchor-free methods can generate more positive samples of small
objects that are apt to be ignored in anchor-based methods. Consequently, approaches such
as APE (Zhu et al. 2020) and AOPG (Cheng et al. 2022) generate samples in an anchorfree manner, refining them for obtaining high-quality detection results. Liang et al. (2022)
proposed a dynamic enhancement-based anchor network that combines the advantages of

13

350

Page 26 of 61

K. Wang et al.

anchor-free and anchor-based methods and uses an interactive sample screening procedure
to yield higher-quality training samples.
Rather than relying on the IoU alone, several methods (Ming et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2023; Fu et al. 2024; Huang et al. 2024) use the prior (e.g., the IoU between the anchor
and GT) and posterior information (e.g., classification and localization confidences) as
the evaluation criteria for screening positive samples. This scheme can push detectors to
dynamically mine high-quality anchors as positive samples. In contrast to static priors (e.g.,
anchor boxes or points) with fixed strides, Xu et al. (2023) designed a dynamic prior with
a coarse-to-fine assigner. Specifically, it first uses deformable convolution (Dai et al. 2017)
to adaptively adjust the prior location and then leverages coarse prior matching and a finer
posterior constraint to dynamically assign samples. This strategy can adaptively assign positive or negative samples according to the shape and posterior information of the objects,
increasing the performance achieved by mainstream detectors for small objects.

6.3 Large aspect ratios
RS images frequently encompass several categories with extremely large aspect ratios, such
as bridges, ships, and harbors. The RIoUs between these categories with anchors are highly
sensitive to orientation errors, thereby causing two primary challenges, i.e., spatial misalignment and inaccurate localization.
Accordingly, a series of well-designed assignment strategies and regression losses have
been proposed to remedy the corresponding issues. Zhu et al. (2020) introduced a lengthindependent IoU (LiIoU). The LiIoU intercepts part of the object box along its long side
based on the length of the anchor and subsequently calculates the IoU between the intercepted object box and the anchor. Compared with the conventional IoU, the LiIoU facilitates the assignment of more positive samples to long objects, thereby increasing the recall
rate. Qian et al. (2023) emphasized that the sampling locations of positive samples should
be close to the center distribution of the oriented GT. This is because two horizontal anchors,
despite having the same IoU as that of the external HBB of an oriented GT with a large
aspect ratio, can differ considerably in their coverage of the GT. Consequently, Qian et al.
(2023) and Wang et al. (2024) both combined the horizontal IoU and sample feature alignment overlap degree to evaluate the quality of an anchor, where the sample feature alignment overlap degree is defined as the ratio of the intersection between the horizontal anchor
and the oriented GT to the GT itself, reflecting the overlap proportions of oriented object
features.
Furthermore, inspired by ATSS (Zhang et al. 2020), SASM (Hou et al. 2022) and
CFL (Sun et al. 2024) use a monotonically decreasing function of the aspect ratio as a
weight for an IoU threshold that controls the sample assignment process. This approach
allows long objects to be assigned lower IoU thresholds. Additionally, several methods (Liu
et al. 2022; Qiao et al. 2023; Gong et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2024) construct weighted orientation losses that depend on the aspect ratio, effectively mitigating the effect of the aspect ratio
on orientation regression.

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 27 of 61

350

6.4 Lack of orientation-annotated samples
Owing to its reliance on numerous and laborious annotations, oriented object detection has
experienced significant advancements in recent years. However, OBB annotation is a timeconsuming and expensive process, resulting in many detection datasets that use HBB annotations but do not provide OBB annotations, thereby restricting their potential application
scopes. To alleviate the annotation burden, researchers have explored two avenues: weakly
supervised learning, in which OBB annotations are replaced by HBB-level or even pointlevel annotations; and semisupervised learning, in which only a few images from the whole
training dataset are annotated.
The mainstream semisupervised oriented object detection methods commonly follow the
pseudo-labeling framework, which consists of a teacher model and a student model. The
teacher model, which is an exponential moving average (EMA) (Tarvainen and Valpola
2017) of the student model at different historical training iterations, generates pseudo-labels
for unannotated images. The paired models are iteratively trained via the following steps.
The teacher model provides pseudo-labels for the unannotated images in a batch, whereas
the student model makes predictions for both the annotated and unannotated images. Then,
the loss for the predictions of the student model is computed. However, the unsupervised
nature of the teacher model introduces noise that can mislead the training process of the
student model, especially considering the arbitrary orientations of objects, which further
impact the resulting pseudo-label quality. Therefore, the current semisupervised oriented
object detection methods (Hua et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2024; Wu et al. 2024) are committed
to generating high-quality pseudo-labels.
SOOD (Hua et al. 2023) introduces two loss functions, i.e., a rotation-aware adaptive
weighting (RAW) loss and a global consistency (GC) loss. The RAW loss focuses on the
orientation consistency between each pseudo-label-prediction pair, dynamically weighting each pair based on their orientation gap. The GC loss measures the global similarity
between the pseudo-labels and the predictions, effectively mitigates noise disturbances and
implicitly regularizes the object relations. Wang et al. (2024) provided an in-depth analysis of the limitations of conventional pseudo-label- and dense pseudo-label-based methods (Zhou et al. 2022). The former approaches adopt a fixed threshold, whereas the latter
methods use a fixed quantity, both of which fail to adaptively select high-quality pseudolabels. To address this issue, global focal learning was proposed to judge important regions
on the basis of the difference between the predictions of the teacher model and the student
model, guiding networks to focus more on inconsistent regions during training. In addition,
the Pseudo-Siamese Teacher (Wu et al. 2024) adopts two teacher models that are updated
by different optimization schemes to improve the reliability of pseudo-labels and uses the
Jensen-Shannon divergence measure to eliminate inconsistent pseudo-labels.
The mainstream weakly supervised oriented object detection methods commonly consist of multiple branches that are fed with multiple augmented views of the input image.
Various consistent losses are then designed to align the features or predictions derived from
different views. H2RBox (Yang et al. 2023), which was the first HBB annotation-based
weakly supervised method, follows a weakly and self-supervised angle learning paradigm.
The weakly supervised part calculates the regression loss between the external HBB of the
predicted OBB and the horizontal GT, whereas the self-supervised part measures the consistency of the angles predicted from two views with different rotation augmentations. On

13

350

Page 28 of 61

K. Wang et al.

the basis of H2RBox, H2RBox-v2 (Yu et al. 2023) leverages reflection symmetry to learn
the orientations of objects in a self-supervised manner. Furthermore, a CircumIoU loss is
designed, allowing H2RBox-v2 to be compatible with the random rotation augmentation
method.
Compared with OBB and HBB annotations, point annotations have lower costs and
greater efficiency.3 The main challenge faced by the point annotation-based methods lies in
enabling the models to perceive the orientations and scales of objects on the basis of point
annotations. PointOBB (Luo et al. 2024) was designed with a resized view (by random
scaling) and a rot/flp view (implemented by random rotation or vertical flipping) based on
original view. Upon these three views, a scale augmentation module and an angle acquisition module were constructed. The former aims to perceive object scales by improving the
consistency between the predicted scores of the original and resized views, whereas the
latter incorporates self-supervised angle learning to predict angles.
Furthermore, Yu et al. (2024) presented Point2RBox, including synthetic pattern knowledge combination and self-supervised transformation schemes. The former first generates
synthetic patterns with known boxes by sampling around each labeled point and then overlays these patterns on the original image, providing knowledge that enables the network
to estimate sizes and angles. The latter is similar to PointOBB, which uses original and
transformed (randomly selected from rotated, flipped, and scaled) views to perceive the
size and orientation differences between objects. In addition, Zhang et al. (2024) proposed
a progressive method, named point-to-mask-to-HBB-to-OBB (PMHO), to achieve oriented
object detection. However, this framework is time-consuming, with each component being
optimized independently; thus, it relies heavily on the capabilities of well-trained models
such as the SAM (Kirillov et al. 2023).

6.5 Discussion
Complex backgrounds, scale variations, large aspect ratios, and the lack of oriented-annotated samples are crucial issues encountered in RS object detection tasks, and they become
more severe in oriented object detection tasks. As stated above, numerous methods have
been proposed to address these issues from various perspectives, e.g., data augmentation
schemes, assignment strategies, reweighted orientation losses, attention mechanisms, selfsupervised losses, and pseudo-labeling frameworks. Unfortunately, the exploration of solutions for these issues is far from mature, so further research may be beneficial. For example,
a significant performance gap remains w.r.t. detecting small or long objects compared to
normal objects, even for the state-of-the-art detectors. On the other hand, the general splitand-detect scheme is inefficient during inference because too many empty patches that
contain only background information are used. Several prior works have preliminarily considered these points, e.g., superresolution-based object detection (Shermeyer and Van Etten
2019; Liu et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023) and focus-and-detect schemes (Duan et al. 2021;
Koyun et al. 2022). Additionally, the accuracy of semi-/weakly supervised oriented object
detection is still far from satisfactory, lagging significantly behind that of fully supervised

3

According to https:​​​//clo​ud.goo​gle​.c​om/ai-pl​atfo​r​m/data-​labeling/pricing, the cost of point annotations is
approximately 50.0% lower than that of HBB annotations and 104.8% lower than that of OBB annotations,
and their time consumption is only 1.2x greater than that of image-level annotations.

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 29 of 61

350

methods. The combination of weakly supervised and semisupervised methods may lead to
new breakthroughs (Wu et al. 2024).

7 Evaluation protocols and datasets
7.1 Evaluation protocols
Accuracy and efficiency are both crucial criteria for evaluating the performance of oriented
object detectors. The evaluation protocol for OBBs is slightly different from that used for
HBBs, as the IoU is replaced with the RIoU. Efficiency evaluations use the frames-per-second (FPS) metric, which is defined as the number of image frames processed by a detector
per second, whereas accuracy evaluations account for both precision and recall. The most
universally agreed-upon metric for accuracy evaluations is AP.
For the object detection task, the detector outputs M predicted results {(bj , cj , sj )}M
j=1 ,
where each item contains an OBB bj and a category label cj with a corresponding confidence score sj . Then, the predicted results are assigned to the GT objects {(b∗k , c∗k )}N
k=1
based on the RIoU and category, where b∗k , c∗k and the superscript ∗ denote the OBB, category label, and GT, respectively. A predicted result (bj , cj , sj ), which is assigned a GT
object (b∗k , c∗k ), is judged to be a true positive (TP) if the following criteria are met.
(1) The predicted label cj accords with the label c∗k of the GT object.
(2) The RIoU between the predicted OBB bj and the GT OBB b∗k , denoted by the RIoU
(b, b∗ ), is not smaller than the predefined RIoU threshold TRIoU . Otherwise, it is regarded
as a false positive (FP).
Once the numbers of TPs and FPs have been obtained, the precision and recall metrics
can be calculated. Precision is the proportion of correctly predicted instances among the
total number of predicted results, whereas recall is the proportion of all positive instances
predicted by the detector among the total number of GT objects. Their formulas are defined
as follows:
P rec(Ts ) =
Rec(Ts ) =

NT P
(3)
NT P + NF P

NT P
NT P
=
(4)
NT P + NF N
N

where NT P , NF P , and NF N denote the numbers of TPs, FPs, and false negatives (FNs),
respectively, which are determined by the score thresholds Ts and TRIoU . Note that the
precision and the recall metrics are functions of the confidence threshold Ts with a fixed
TRIoU .
However, neither precision nor recall can independently evaluate the accuracy of a detector, whereas AP can combine both precision and recall. For each category, by gradually varying Ts from 1.0 to 0.0, the recall increases as NT P increases, and a list of pairs (Prec, Rec)
can be obtained. This allows precision to be considered a discrete function of recall, i.e.,
the precision–recall curve (PRC), which is denoted by P(R). The AP value is obtained by
computing the average precision value P(R) over the interval from R = 0.0 to R = 1.0:

13

350

Page 30 of 61

K. Wang et al.

AP =

Rec(0)
1 ∑
max
P (R)(5)
n
R≥ N
N
n=0

Ultimately, to evaluate the overall accuracy across all categories, the mAP averaged over all
categories is adopted as the final evaluation metric.

7.2 Datasets
Recently, several research groups have released dozens of high-quality RS image datasets, each of which dramatically boosts the development of RS object detection methods.
Datasets annotated only with HBBs, including DIOR (Li et al. 2020), LEVIR (Zou and Shi
2018), NWPU VHR-10 (Cheng et al. 2014), RSOD (Xiao et al. 2015; Long et al. 2017),
xView (Lam et al. 2018), and HRRSD (Zhang et al. 2019), are not covered here. In addition, several oriented object detection datasets with horizontal views, e.g., text detection
datasets (Karatzas et al. 2015), and datasets derived from different modalities, such as SAR
datasets (Wei et al. 2020; Lei et al. 2021), exhibit significant differences in their viewing
angles, scenes, and imaging characteristics relative to optical RS datasets. Thus, this paper
does not introduce these datasets. In this subsection, we only focus on introducing optical
RS datasets annotated with OBBs, including SZTAKI-INRIA (Benedek et al. 2012), 3K
vehicle (Liu and Mattyus 2015), UCAS-AOD (Zhu et al. 2015), VEDAI (Razakarivony
and Jurie 2016), HRSC2016 (Liu et al. 2016), DOTA (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022),
ShipRSImageNet (Zhang et al. 2021), DIOR-R (Cheng et al. 2022), DroneVehicle (Sun
et al. 2022), FAIR1M (Sun et al. 2022), and GLH-Bridge (Li et al. 2024). Table 3 shows
the parameters of the above RS-oriented object detection datasets for making an intuitive
comparison. Given that the emergence of DOTA has greatly promoted the development of
oriented object detection, we divide the datasets into two parts, namely, early and modern
datasets, based on the time at which DOTA was introduced. Only the most typical datasets among the above datasets are described in detail owing to space restrictions. For more
details, please refer to Sect. C of the Appendix.
DOTA (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022) contains large quantities of objects with a
considerable variety of orientations, scales, and appearances. The images were selected
from different sensors and platforms, including Google Earth, the GF-2 satellite, and UAVs.
Three versions of this dataset are available. The numbers of images and instances contained
in the three versions of DOTA are summarized in Table 4. DOTA-V1.0 (Xia et al. 2018)
and DOTA-V1.5 share the same images, which are split into training, validation, and test
subsets. As an extension of DOTA-V1.0, DOTA-V1.5 annotates extremely small instances
whose sizes are equal to or less than 10 pixels. Compared with the previous versions, DOTAV2.0 (Ding et al. 2022) contains more images. In addition, many images were taken under
an oblique view and a lower foreground ratio to approach real-world application scenes.
The number of instances has increased to approximately 1.8 million. Moreover, it contains
two test subsets, namely, test-dev and test-challenge. The latter comprises a greater number
of object instances (approximately 1.1 million) and more complicated scenes, making the
associated task more challenging.
DIOR-R (Cheng et al. 2022) is a large-scale dataset that contains 192,518 instances covering 20 common categories with notable interclass similarity and intraclass discrepancies.

13

Table 3 Comparison of public RS image datasets
Dataset
Early
SZTAKI-INRIA (Benedek et al. 2012)
3K vehicle (Liu and Mattyus 2015)
UCAS-AOD (Zhu et al. 2015)
VEDAI (Razakarivony and Jurie 2016)
HRSC2016 (Liu et al. 2016)
Modern
DOTA-V1.0 (Xia et al. 2018)
DOTA-V1.5
DOTA-V2.0 (Ding et al. 2022)
FGSD (Chen et al. 2020)
ShipRSImageNet (Zhang et al. 2021)
DIOR-R (Cheng et al. 2022)
DroneVehicle (Sun et al. 2022)
FAIR1M (Sun et al. 2022)
GLH-Bridge (Li et al. 2024)
Publication
TPAMI 2012
GRSL 2015
ICIP 2015
JVCIR 2016
GRSL 2016
CVPR 2018
–
TPAMI 2022
arxiv 2020
JSTAR 2021
TGRS 2022
TCSVT 2022
ISPRS 2022
TPAMI2024

Category
1
1
2
9
25
15
16
18
43
50
20
5
37
1

Quantity
9
20
2420
1210
1070
2806
2806
11,268
5634
3435
23,463
56,878
42,796
6,000

Instance
665
14,235
14,596
3640
2976
188,282
403,318
1,793,658
2612
17,573
192,518
953,087
>1,000,000
59,737

GSD
–
0.13m
–
0.125m
0.4∼2 m
0.1∼4.5m
0.1∼4.5m
0.1∼4.5m
0.12∼1.93m
0.12∼6 m
0.5∼30 m
–
0.3∼0.8m
0.3∼1.0m

Resolution
600 × 500∼ 1400 × 800
5516 × 3744
1280 × 659
1024 × 1024
300 × 300∼ 1500 × 900
800 × 800∼ 20, 000 × 20, 000
800 × 800∼ 20, 000 × 20, 000
800 × 800∼ 29, 200 × 27, 620
930 × 930
930 × 930∼ 1400 × 1000
800 × 800
640 × 512
600 × 600∼ 10, 000 × 10, 000
2048 × 2048∼ 16, 384 × 16, 384

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…
Page 31 of 61
350

13

350

Page 32 of 61

K. Wang et al.

The previous version of DIOR-R, i.e., DIOR (Li et al. 2020), was initially released in 2019
using HBB annotations. Later, in 2021, OBB annotations were added to form the DIOR-R
dataset. It includes 23,463 images chosen carefully from more than 80 countries, thereby
possessing richer viewpoint, illumination, background, appearance, and occlusion variations. In particular, it contains some traffic infrastructures, such as train stations, expressway
service areas, and airports, as well as some common categories in the suburbs, such as dams
and wind mills, due to their significant value in transportation analyses. In addition, the
GSD ranges from 0.5 m to 30 m, resulting in a large range of size variations. Thus, the rich
diversity among its instances, images, and scales makes this dataset valuable for real-world
tasks but presents challenges.
Ship datasets Recently, a series of ship datasets have drawn widespread attention due to the
potential value of ship detection in fishing and maritime security scenarios. HRSC2016 (Liu
et al. 2016) is one of the most widely used datasets for evaluating oriented object detection
algorithms. It covers more than 25 categories of ships with large scale, orientation, appearance, shape, and background (e.g., seas and ports) variations. FGSD (Chen et al. 2020) is a
new fine-grained ship detection dataset that was expanded from HRSC2016. Its instances
are classified into 43 categories, which are further divided into 4 high-level categories:
submarines, aircraft carriers, civil ships, and warships. In addition to ships, a new category
named docks is also annotated in this dataset for future research. ShipRSImageNet (Zhang
et al. 2021) is the largest RS dataset for ship detection. It contains 3,435 images collected
from xView (Lam et al. 2018), HRSC2016 (Liu et al. 2016), FGSD (Chen et al. 2020), the
Airbus Ship Detection Challenge, and Chinese satellites. A total of 17,573 ships are divided
into 50 categories. The dataset contains diverse spatial resolutions, scales, aspect ratios,
backgrounds, and orientations.
DroneVehicle (Sun et al. 2022) is a large-scale RGB-infrared cross-modal vehicle
detection dataset captured by UAVs. This dataset was released to address vehicle detection challenges encountered in smart city traffic management and disaster rescue scenarios,
especially under conditions with insufficient lighting. The dataset includes two modalities,
RGB images and infrared images, with an equal number of images in each modality, collectively forming image pairs. This dual-modality design can provide complementary information under different lighting conditions; e.g., RGB images provide rich color information,
whereas infrared images excel in low-light conditions, as they are unaffected by darkness.
In addition, the dataset covers a wide range of daytime and nighttime scenarios, including
urban roads, rural areas, residential areas, and parking lots, ensuring the diversity and practicality of the data.
FAIR1M (Sun et al. 2022) is currently the largest fine-grained object detection dataset
of high-resolution RS images, containing more than one million instances and over 40,000
images. All instances in this dataset were carefully annotated with OBBs, covering 5 main
categories and 37 fine-grained subcategories, such as different types of aircrafts, ships,
courts, roads, and vehicles. The images were sourced from different sensors and platforms,
with target scenes covering hundreds of typical cities and towns as well as commonly used
airports and ports globally, providing rich geographic information and practical application
scenarios. The fine-grained annotations, intraclass and interclass variation similarities, large
ranges of sizes and orientations, and complex scenes make this dataset extremely challenging while also promoting the development of object detection methods in the field of RS.

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…
Table 4 Comparison of the three
versions of DOTA

Images

Instances
The number of images and
instances of each split subset is
counted

Training
Validation
Test/Test-dev
Test-challenge
Total
Training
Validation
Test/Test-dev
Test-challenge
Total

V1.0
1411
458
937
–
2806
98,990
28,853
60,439
–
188,282

Page 33 of 61
V1.5

210,631
69,565
121,893
–
403,318

350

V2.0
1830
593
2792
6053
11,268
268,627
81,048
353,346
1,090,637
1,793,658

GLH-Bridge (Li et al. 2024) is a large-scale bridge detection dataset comprising 6,000
very-high-resolution (VHR) RS images sampled from diverse geographic locations around
the globe. This dataset covers a wide range of scenarios and bridge types, enhancing its
generalizability to real-world situations. Additionally, the various object scales and extreme
aspect ratios contained in the dataset pose a formidable challenge for oriented object detection methods.

7.3 Discussion
The early datasets often featured limited numbers of instances and images, encompassing a narrow range of scenarios. Consequently, detection methods approached performance
saturation on these datasets, making them unable to provide reliable evaluations. Modern
datasets generally encompass more challenging and general scenarios with relatively complex backgrounds. They not only cover astonishing numbers of instances (up to millions)
and fine-grained categories (e.g., FGSD and FAIR1M) but also possess large-scale images
(up to 20, 000 × 20, 000 pixels), making them highly aligned with real-world application
scenarios.
Both early and modern datasets play pivotal roles in propelling oriented object detection methods to new heights, making significant contributions to the field. HRSC2016 (Liu
et al. 2016) is an early benchmark, but as detection methods reached their performance
plateau on this dataset, it gradually fell out of favor. Although the subsequent datasets, e.g.,
FGSD (Chen et al. 2020) and ShipRSImageNet (Zhang et al. 2021), attempt to expand
upon it, they failed to garner sufficient attention because of their relatively limited numbers
of instances relative to those of larger-scale datasets. DOTA-V1.0 (Xia et al. 2018), as the
most representative dataset for oriented object detection, serves as the most commonly used
benchmark for evaluating the performance of detection methods. Subsequently, DOTAV2.0 (Ding et al. 2022), which is characterized by its large scale and high level of challenge,
and FAIR1M (Sun et al. 2022), which focuses on fine-grained oriented object detection,
gradually became new benchmarks for evaluating the performance of cutting-edge methods.
Modern large-scale datasets provide solid data foundations for the deployment and
implementation of real-world applications. By utilizing large-scale datasets for pretraining
and transfer learning, the development and time costs of different methods can be significantly reduced, while the recognition accuracies of oriented object detection models can be
improved, facilitating their application in various fields.

13

350

Page 34 of 61

K. Wang et al.

City management With the acceleration of urbanization and the continuous expansion
of urban areas, traditional ground traffic monitoring systems have gradually revealed their
limitations in terms of delayed responses. Due to their remarkable flexibility, UAVs are
widely applied in traffic dispersion and traffic flow monitoring cases (Sun et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022), emerging as a cutting-edge force in urban traffic management.
Industrial inspection Industrial facilities such as bridges and wind turbines often require
significant amounts of labor and time for inspections, posing challenges for manual inspections (Cheng et al. 2022; Li et al. 2024). The incorporation of UAVs or satellites and intelligent detection technology can significantly improve the efficiency of inspections and ensure
the safety of personnel.
Port management Through the use of advanced image processing algorithms and object
detection technology, various objects within port areas, such as ships and port facilities, can
be automatically identified from satellite imagery, thereby optimizing the efficiency of port
operations and enhancing safety (Liu et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2021).
Security surveillance The detection of critical objects in satellite imagery, such as airplanes and airports, plays a vital role in security surveillance scenarios (Ding et al. 2022).

8 State-of-the-art methods
As a comprehensive survey on oriented object detection, this paper introduces the recent
advances and provides a structural taxonomy based on the existing detection frameworks,
OBB representations, and other strategies in Sects. 3, 4, and 5, respectively. In this section,
we select several publicly available detectors to compare them in a unified manner. Specifically, we take the DOTA-V1.0 dataset since it contains almost all the typical challenges
related to this task, including arbitrary orientations, large-scale variations, and large aspect
ratios. We report the performance achieved by the state-of-the-art detectors in terms of the
mAP metrics and present the crucial modules of each detector in Table 5. According to the
performance comparison and previous discussion, we concentrate on the key elements that
have evolved in oriented object detection, including the detection frameworks, OBB regression techniques, feature representation approaches, and solutions to common issues.
(1) Detection frameworks Two-stage detectors achieve the best performance in terms
of the mAP since they can extract accurate region-based features that are more suited for
classification and regression tasks. The typical two-stage oriented object detection methods
commonly design a rotated proposal generation scheme to obtain more accurate rotated
proposals, such as the RoI Transformer (Ding et al. 2019) and Oriented RCNN (Xie et al.
2021). Similarly, the majority of one-stage and anchor-free detectors introduce a refined
stage for aligning features, including R3 Det (Yang et al. 2021), S2ANet (Han et al. 2022),
CFA (Guo et al. 2021, 2022), and Oriented RepPoints (Li et al. 2022). Benefiting from their
additional refined stage and advanced loss functions, one-stage detectors can also reach
approximately equal accuracy to that of two-stage detectors. Despite achieving state-of-theart performance in general object detection tasks, the DETR-based methods still lag behind
the other competitors in oriented object detection, even with more training epochs. This may
be because the query paradigm cannot adequately cover rotated objects. To this end, it is
desirable to further investigate DETR-based methods that can compete in this field.

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 35 of 61

350

(2) OBB regression techniques Advanced loss functions are conducive to alleviating the
problems caused by orientation parameters and achieving better regression effects, including the Gaussian distance-based loss (e.g., GWD (Yang et al. 2021), KLD (Yang et al.
2021), and KFIoU (Yang et al. 2022)). These methods draw upon a trigonometric encoder
and joint optimization to achieve strong performance. On the other hand, very large gaps
are observed between different OBB representation methods; e.g., the midpoint offset representation scheme enables the Oriented RCNN to outperform the rotated Faster RCNN by
approximately 2 mAP in the single-scale and multiscale results. In addition, the novel OBB
representation methods elegantly avoid angular boundary discontinuities, thus enhancing
their model performance, but they rely on complex post-processing operations and additional modules, including customized loss functions (e.g., the CIoU (Guo et al. 2021)) or
assigners (e.g., APAA (Li et al. 2022)). Therefore, advanced loss functions and OBB representation methods are crucial for attaining improved regression accuracy.
(3) Feature representation approaches As some of the most important components in
oriented object detection, backbone networks play a critical role in learning high-level
semantic feature representations. The most widely used backbone networks include the
ResNet (He et al. 2016; Xie et al. 2017) series and transformer architectures (Dosovitskiy
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2021). Although transformer-based
methods dominate the field of computer vision tasks, they significantly outperform their
CNN-based counterparts in oriented object detection scenarios, achieving state-of-the-art
performance. Specifically, Oriented RCNN-RVSA (Wang et al. 2022) and Oriented RCNNSTD (Yu et al. 2024), as the top-performing detectors based on transformers, outperform
the Oriented RCNN (Xie et al. 2021) by 1.22% and 2.22% in terms of the mAP metric,
respectively. Nevertheless, compared with CNNs, transformers suffer from longer training
convergence times and expensive computing costs.
(4) Solutions to common issues Attention mechanisms and semantic mask modules, e.g.,
SCRDet (Yang et al. 2019), TSH (Yu et al. 2023), and HRDet (Yao et al. 2024), are effective ways to reduce background noise and enhance object information. With respect to the
issue of large aspect ratios, reweighted loss functions and novel assignment strategies can
effectively improve the resulting detection accuracy, as seen in RPGAOD (Qiao et al. 2023),
DFDet (Xie et al. 2024), CFL (Sun et al. 2024), and CGCDet (Wang et al. 2024). These
components are removed during the inference process; thus, they do not affect the inference
speed. On the other hand, as shown in Table 5, detectors with multiscale training and testing
(MS),4 achieve an average improvement of approximately 3% in terms of the mAP, proving that MS is a useful strategy for alleviating scale variations. However, MS suffers from
extremely long training and inference times, which are approximately 10 times greater than
those of single-scale training and testing (SS). Overall, addressing common issues such as
background noise, large aspect ratios, and scale variations is crucial for improving oriented
object detection methods.

MS generally first resizes the original images to three scales (i.e. {0.5, 1.0, 1.5}), which are then cropped to
1, 024 × 1, 024 patches with strides of 524. In contrast, SS crops only the original images into patches with
sizes of 1, 024 × 1, 024 and strides of 824.
4

13

Two-stage
Rotated faster
RCNN (Ren
et al. 2015)
RoI transformer (Ding et al.
2019)
Oriented
RCNN (Xie
et al. 2021)
Gliding vertex (Xu et al.
2021)
ReDet (Han
et al. 2021)
OSKDet (Lu
et al. 2022)
AOPG (Cheng
et al. 2022)
DEA (Liang
et al. 2022)
RVSA (Wang
et al. 2022)
RPGAOD (Qiao et al.
2023)
QPDet (Yao
et al. 2023)
FRIoU
loss (Qian et al.
2023)

13

Res50

Res50

CVPR 2019 Faster RCNN

Faster RCNN

Faster RCNN

ICCV 2021

TPAMI
2021

ReDet

Oriented
RCNN
Oriented
RCNN

Oriented
RCNN
Oriented
RCNN

TGRS 2022

TGRS 2022

TGRS 2023

Res50

Res50
–

–

GRG-RPN

ViT+RVSA –

Res50

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Anchor
Free
–

–

–

–

–

–

Head

FRIoU

–

AAO

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Reg
loss

–

–

–

–

–

GFL
v2
–

–

–

–

–

–

Cls
loss

–

Quadrant Point

–

–

–

Unordered
Keypoints
–

–

Gliding Vertex

Midpoint Offset

–

–

OBB
representation

FE

80.02∗

75.69∗

76.45

76.25

76.47

78.61

75.22

76.37

76.25

80.78

81.00

81.20

80.80

80.37

80.66

80.91

80.10

80.43∗

75.63∗

75.02

78.49∗

mAPMS

73.40∗

mAP-SS

Page 36 of 61

TGRS 2023

TGRS 2023

Res50

Faster RCNN

TGRS 2022

ReRes50

–

Res50

–

–

–

–

–

Assigner

Rotated
–
FCOS
FCOS+RPN –

–

ReRes50

–

Oriented
RPN

RRoI
learner

–

CVPR 2021 RoI
Transformer
CVPR 2022 Faster RCNN

Res50

Res50

Faster RCNN

NIPS 2015

Table 5 Comparisons of state-of-the-art methods on DOTA-V1.0
Method
Publication Baseline
Backbone
RPN

350
K. Wang et al.

–
DAS
–
–
–

Res50

Res50

Res50

Res50

Res50

Res50

RetinaNet

RetinaNet

RetinaNet

R3 Det

RetinaNet

R2 SSD

R3 Det

R3 Det

ICCV 2019

CSL (Yang and ECCV 2020
Yan 2020)
R3 Det (Yang AAAI 2021
et al. 2021)
CVPR 2021
DCL (Yang
et al. 2021)
DAL (Ming
AAAI 2021
et al. 2021)
FoRTGRS 2021
Det (Zhang
et al. 2022)
GWD (Yang
ICML 2021
et al. 2021)
KLD (Yang
NeurIPS
et al. 2021)
2021
BCD (Yang
TPAMI
et al. 2022)
2022

R3 Det

–

Res50

RetinaNet

Res50

SF-Net

Res50

–

–

–

–

–

–

OCP-Guided

ICCV 2017

ViT

–

Oriented
RCNN

Res50

AAAI 2024

Assigner

RoI
Transformer

RPN

TNNLS
2024

Backbone

CGCDet (Wang
et al. 2024)
STD (Yu et al.
2024)
One-stage
Rotated
RetinaNet (Lin
et al. 2017)
SCRDet (Yang
et al. 2019)

Baseline

Publication

Method

Table 5 (continued)

–

–

–

–

–

–

FRM

–

–

–

MAEB

–

Head

–

–

Cls
loss
–

BCD

KLD

GWD

FARL

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

IoU–
Smooth
L1
–
–

–

–

Reg
loss
CGC

Gaussian

Gaussian

Gaussian

–

–

DCL

–

CSL

–

–

–

OBB
representation
–

FRM

MDA

FE

72.22

71.73

71.56

71.44

71.44

71.21

70.18∗

69.51∗

72.61

68.80∗

77.34

mAP-SS

82.24

mAPMS
80.70

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…
Page 37 of 61
350

13

13

RetinaNet

RetinaNet

S2ANet

S2ANet

TGRS 2023

TII 2024

TGRS 2024

TIM 2024

H104

Res101

Res50

Res50

ISPRS 2021 FCOS

CVPR 2021 RepPoints

CVPR 2022 RepPoints

TGRS 2022

RPN

–

APAA

–

–

–

STS

–

GADL

TCA

–

DCFL

DAS

–

Assigner

–

–

KFIoU

–

–

Reg
loss
–

–

–

CFA

–

DRH

CFS

–

Gaussian

–

–

OBB
representation
–

–

–

–

–

–

–

CSL

Adaptive Points

Convex-Hull

Middle lines

–

–

–

JLRQ –

TCL

–

–

–

Cls
loss
–

GF-CSL –

–

CIoU

–

–

–

SRK+RFR –

–

TCH

–

–

RARM

FAM

Head

FSM

PAM

FE

74.68

75.97

75.05

72.80

70.70

75.35

75.23

74.80

75.18

71.60

74.26

73.50

74.12

mAP-SS

77.54

80.63

79.97

80.05

mAPMS
79.42

Page 38 of 61

CenterNet

H104

CVPR 2020 CenterNet

Res50

Res50

Res50

Res50

Res50

R3 Det

Res50

ICLR 2023

RetinaNet

TGRS 2022

Res50

Res50

RetinaNet

TGRS 2022

S2ANet (Han
et al. 2022)
CFCNet (Ming et al.
2022)
DCFL (Xu
et al. 2023)
KFIoU (Yang
et al. 2022)
TCD (Zhang
et al. 2023)
FADL-Net (Fu
et al. 2024)
TIR-Net (Li
et al. 2024)
CFL (Sun et al.
2024)
Anchor-Free
DRN (Pan
et al. 2020)
O2-DNet (Wei
et al. 2020)
CFA (Guo
et al. 2021,
2022)
Oriented RepPoints (Li et al.
2022)
GFL (Wang
et al. 2022)

Backbone

CVPR 2023 S2ANet

Baseline

Publication

Method

Table 5 (continued)

350
K. Wang et al.

Baseline

Backbone

RPN

Assigner

Head

Reg
loss
SA-M

Cls
loss

OBB
representation
–

FE

mAP-SS

mAPMS
77.19

SASM (Hou
AAAI 2022 RepPoints
Res50
SA-S
–
74.92
et al. 2022)
DHRec (Nie
TPAMI
FCOS
Res50
–
–
–
–
DHRec
74.57
78.97
and Huang
2023
2023)
DRDet (Zhang TGRS 2023 FCOS
Res50
–
OFE
–
–
DRLs
74.85
79.34
et al. 2023)
TSH (Yu et al. TGRS 2023 FCOS
Res50
–
–
JQE
PBL
ISM
77.18
2023)
HRDet (Yao
TCSVT
FCOS
Res50
–
–
EIoU
–
–
HMP
74.11
78.90
et al. 2024)
2024
DFDet (Xie
TGRS 2024 FCOS
Res50
–
–
PIAS
–
–
CDMN 74.71
80.37
et al. 2024)
DETR-Based
AO2-DETCSVT
Deformable
Res50
–
AOPR
–
–
–
70.91
TR (Dai et al.
2023
DETR
2022)
ARS-DETGRS 2024 DINO
Res50
ARM
RDA
ARA–
–
73.79
TR (Zeng et al.
CSL
2024)
(⋅)†∗ indicates the detection results provided by the MMRotate (Zhou et al. 2022). – indicates that the method follows the default modules of the corresponding baseline. RPN
Region proposal networks. Reg Loss Regression loss. Cls loss Classification loss. FE Feature Enhancement Methods. mAP-SS Single-scale test performance on DOTA-V1.0.
mAP-MS Multiscale test performance on DOTA-V1.0. Res50 ResNet-50 (He et al. 2016). ReRes50 Rotation Equivariant ResNet-50. H104 Hourglass-104 (Newell et al. 2016).
ViT Vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al. 2021)

Publication

Table 5 (continued)

Method

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…
Page 39 of 61
350

13

350

Page 40 of 61

K. Wang et al.

9 Conclusions and future directions
Performing oriented object detection on RS images is an important and challenging task in
the field of RS and has been actively investigated. As summarized in this survey, a variety of
methods have rapidly developed in recent years, demonstrating remarkable progress. In this
survey, we first review the evolution process from horizontal to oriented object detection
and summarize the typical challenges. Next, we provide a structural taxonomy for the existing detection frameworks and highlight the milestone detectors. We also present a detailed
elaboration of OBB regression techniques and feature representation approaches. Furthermore, we discuss the common issues encountered in RS scenarios and the corresponding
methods for solving them. Finally, we summarize the commonly used datasets and compare
the excellent methods that have emerged in recent years.
Despite the rising prominence of artificial intelligence, deep learning has rapidly
advanced the development of oriented object detection methods. However, owing to the
presence of complex and ever-changing real-world scenarios, the performance of deep
learning still faces limitations, hindering robust and reliable practical applications. Over the
years, a considerable amount of research effort has been dedicated to tackling the challenges
of feature misalignment, spatial misalignment, and OBB regression, as well as common
issues (e.g., complex backgrounds, scale variations, large aspect ratios, and the lack of annotated samples). These efforts have led to marked improvements in detection performance.
Nevertheless, it is imperative to acknowledge that a considerable gap persists between the
current detection capabilities and the demands of practical applications. More critically, several issues remain insufficiently addressed, posing significant barriers to achieving further
advancements in oriented object detection technology.
Low detection efficiency Detection efficiency is a pivotal factor in real-world applications
of detectors. The current state-of-the-art oriented object detection models were designed
to be exceptionally complex to achieve superior detection accuracy. Nevertheless, their
intricate network architectures markedly impede their detection efficiency, rendering them
unsuitable for real-time applications.
Imbalanced datasets Modern datasets focus on general scenarios and contain images
derived from a variety of different environments and contexts. While this diversity helps
models learn a wider range of features, it may also lead to poor performance in specific
scenarios (such as those with snow, fog, and occlusion). Additionally, common scenes
or objects may constitute the majority of these datasets, whereas rare or special scenes
or objects may be scarce. This data imbalance issue may cause models to develop biases
toward certain scenes or objects during training, resulting in performance degradations.
Detection in a single-modal image The current research community is dedicated to
exploring and developing oriented object detection methods for single-modal images. However, these methods are inherently constrained by their reliance on a solitary information
source and the lack of contextual cues, resulting in heightened vulnerability to various interference sources, including variations in lighting conditions, occlusions, and shadows.
Given that the aforementioned issues have not yet been explored and studied in the
oriented object detection field, we further share some insights concerning potential future
research directions.
Lightweight methods The demand for real-time object detectors on resource-limited
mobile devices is increasing, necessitating innovative solutions that can overcome hard-

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 41 of 61

350

ware constraints. Thus, lightweight oriented object detection architectures are required
to fulfill the requirements of mobile and embedded applications. A feasible approach for
promoting the application of oriented object detection in real-world scenarios is to adopt
meticulously designed efficient network architectures or leverage neural architecture
searches (Xiong et al. 2021) to discover optimal architectures. These lightweight network
architectures enhance the efficiency and accuracy of feature extraction while concurrently
reducing model parameter count and computational burden. For example, several lightweight network structures, such as MobileNet (Howard et al. 2017) and ShuffleNet (Zhang
et al. 2018), have gained widespread adoption in object detection tasks. Another feasible
method is to perform model compressions to develop highly competitive, compact, and
rapid detection models, including parameter pruning (Hanson and Pratt 1988; Han et al.
2015; Gao et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024), quantization (Song et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2023;
Ding et al. 2024), and knowledge distillation models (Hinton et al. 2015; Zheng et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2024). These compression techniques have demonstrated marked effectiveness
in bolstering the generalization capabilities of models and mitigating underfitting during the
training processes of efficient object detection models.
Mission-specific datasets In light of the prevailing imbalances among the categories and
scenarios contained within the current datasets, coupled with the emerging trend of research
on multimodal large-scale models, we delineate the future dataset collection directions from
three perspectives: scenario-specific datasets, multimodal datasets, and large-scale datasets.
Scenario-specific datasets can provide more refined and accurate data that are tailored
to specific scenarios (e.g., severe weather conditions, or rare scenarios), thus empowering
models to achieve superior performance within those specific scenarios. Moreover, these
datasets can effectively address the scarcity of high-quality data in specialized scenarios,
thereby enhancing the generalization capabilities of models and promoting the practical
application of oriented object detection in specialized fields.
Compared with single-modal oriented object detection datasets, multimodal datasets integrate diverse data types that complement each other, providing a wealth of data
resources that are essential for tackling intricate problems. By leveraging the connections
and relationships among various data types and fusing information derived from multiple
modalities, the accuracy and performance of models can be substantially enhanced, leading
to more comprehensive and accurate analysis results. An interesting attempt is DroneVehicle (Sun et al. 2022), in which two modalities–RGB and infrared–offer complementary
information across different lighting conditions. RGB images offer rich color information,
whereas infrared images excel under low-light conditions and are not affected by darkness.
In the future, with the continuous development of more efficient and accurate multimodal
technologies (Chen et al. 2020; Radford et al. 2021; Li et al. 2022, 2023), multimodal datasets will play a pivotal role in a wide array of fields, driving continuous innovations in
oriented object detection technology.
Owing to their exceptional representation and generalization capacities, large models
have emerged as a focal point of the current research (Vaswani et al. 2017; Ho et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2021; Kirillov et al. 2023). By relying on extensive data samples, large models
can discern intricate features and underlying patterns within the input data, thereby enhancing both their accuracy and generalizability. As the technology pertaining to large models
continues to advance, their ability to handle complex scenarios and multimodal data will be
further enhanced, which will increase the possibility of performing oriented object detec-

13

350

Page 42 of 61

K. Wang et al.

tion. Consequently, there is a pressing need to develop high-quality, large-scale datasets that
are tailored for oriented object detection. These datasets will not only provide a rich repository of samples but also serve as a robust validation platform to facilitate the training and
evaluation of large models in this domain.
Multimodal large models Multimodal large models, as a critical avenue for the progression of artificial intelligence toward artificial general intelligence (AGI), have emerged as
a focal point of the current research (Li et al. 2023; Kirillov et al. 2023).. However, the
existing oriented object detection methods predominantly concentrate on extracting valuable information from single-modal images, neglecting the guidance provided by multimodal data. On the other hand, the scarcity of high-quality multimodal data is a fundamental
bottleneck that impedes the advancement of multimodal large models within the domain of
oriented object detection. A prominent direction for future research will involve the exploration and integration of multimodal data. This encompasses the amalgamation of text and
visual large models; the incorporation of global positioning system (GPS), inertial measurement unit (IMU), and RS imagery; and the fusion of diverse sensors. By harnessing the
synergies among these various data modalities, we can unlock new potential techniques for
enhancing the accuracy and robustness of oriented object detection methods. As technology
continues to evolve, driven by the proliferation of data and the expansion of application
scenarios, multimodal large models are expected to significantly increase the performance
achieved in oriented object detection tasks.

Appendix A θ -based representation
The θ-based representation adopts a vector in the format of (x, y, w, h, θ) to define an
OBB. The present approaches can be classified into two types according to their definitions of the angle θ, including the OpenCV definition (which follows the OpenCV protocol)
and the long edge definition. As shown in Fig. 16a, the former defines θ as the acute (or
right) angle between the OBB and the x-axis, leading to θ ∈ (0, π2 ]. Note that the width w is
defined as the side of the acute angle and can be shorter than the height h, which is shown at
the top of Fig. 16a. To address this issue, the long edge definition sets θ as the angle between
the long edge of the OBB and the x-axis. Therefore, the angular range is [− π2 , π2 ) (Ding
et al. 2019; Han et al. 2021) or [− π4 , 3π
4 ) (Han et al. 2022), which are shown in Fig. 16b and
Fig. 16c, respectively. As shown at the bottom of Fig. 16, the parameters used for the same
OBB have significant differences in different OBB representation schemes.
Built upon well-designed horizontal detectors, most oriented object detectors predict
OBBs through regression. In the θ-based OBB representation, given an anchor box denoted
by ba = (xa , ya , wa , ha , θa ), the detectors first predicts the offsets between it and the predicted OBB:
xp − xa p
yp − ya
, ty =
,
wa
ha
(
)(A1)
θp − θa
wp p
hp
tpw = log
, th = log , tpθ = f
wa
ha
π
tpx =

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 43 of 61

350

Fig. 16 Definition of θ-based representation. The OBBs depicted in the top or bottom row are the same.
a OpenCV Definition (θ ∈ (0, π2 ])(Top height is longer than width. Bottom width is longer than height).
b Long edge definition with an angular range of [− π2 , π2 ). c Long edge definition with an angular range
)
of [− π4 , 3π
4

where bp = (xp , yp , wp , hp , θp ) denotes the predicted OBB. f (·) is used to ensure that the
angle difference remains within the preset range, thus avoiding the impact of the PoA. Similarly, the GT offsets are denoted by
xg − xa g
yg − ya
, ty =
,
wa
ha
(
)(A2)
θg − θa
wg g
hg
tgw = log
, th = log , tgθ = f
wa
ha
π
tgx =

where bg = (xg , yg , wg , hg , θg ) denotes the GT OBB. Hence, the objective function for the
regression task is as follows:
Lreg =

∑

i∈{x,y,w,h,θ}

Ln (tpi − tgi )
(A3)

where Ln (·) denotes the Ln norm, and the smooth L1 loss (Girshick 2015) is widely
adopted. Owing to the PoA problem (Qian et al. 2021, 2022; Yang et al. 2021, 2022), the
OBB regression process encounters the following challenges.
(1) Metric-loss inconsistency Although the majority of detectors adopt the smooth L1
loss as their objective function for regression, the most commonly used metric for local-

13

350

Page 44 of 61

K. Wang et al.

ization is the RIoU. Therefore, an inconsistency is present between the loss function and
the evaluation metric. This implies that an optimal choice for the regression task may not
guarantee high localization accuracy in terms of the RIoU. Moreover, a good regression loss
function should consider the central point distance, aspect ratio, and overlap area, which
have been demonstrated to be effective in horizontal object detection tasks (Rezatofighi
et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020). However, the aspect ratio and the overlap area can be easily
disregarded by the smooth L1 loss.
We illustrate the metric-loss inconsistency in Fig. 17. As shown in Fig. 17a, the top and
bottom rows have different angle differences, while the aspect ratios of the OBBs on the left
are different from those on the right. Moreover, the center points, widths, and heights of the
four cases are the same. The orange area denotes the IoU between a pair of OBBs. Note that
the regression loss is sensitive to angle variances but remains unchanged under different
aspect ratios. Specifically, when the aspect ratio varies, the union of two OBBs changes, but
their intersection is constant, causing a change in the RIoU. The same conclusion can be
drawn from Fig. 17b, which shows the variation curves exhibited by the RIoU and smooth
L1 loss w.r.t. the aspect ratio under different angle differences. Note that the RIoU changes
drastically, but the smooth L1 loss remains constant. Furthermore, Fig. 17c shows the variation curves exhibited by the RIoU and smooth L1 loss w.r.t. the angle under different aspect
ratios. In the neighborhood of 0, both losses are consistent in their monotonicity but not in
their convexity. The RIoU changes more intensely than the smooth L1 loss does when the
angle difference is close to zero.
(2) Angular boundary discontinuities and the square-like problem
Because of the PoA problem (Yang et al. 2021, 2022; Qian et al. 2021, 2022), the smooth
L1 loss suffers from the angular boundary discontinuities, which is illustrated in Fig. 18.
Specifically, a small angle difference may cause a large loss change when the angular value
approaches the angular boundary range. Figure 18a shows an ideal OBB representation,
where the predicted and GT OBBs differ only slightly in terms of their angles and center
points. For OBBs with the OpenCV definition, their angular value must be an acute or right
angle, i.e., θ ∈ (0, π2 ], as shown in Fig. 18b. As a result, the angle difference between the
two OBBs increases sharply as the angular value approaches 0 or π2 . In addition, the width
of the predicted OBB is the short edge, whereas the width of the GT OBB is the long edge,
causing significant regression losses for the width and height. For OBBs under the long
edge definition with an angular range of [− π2 , π2 ), an angular boundary discontinuity leads
to a significant angle difference, i.e., |θg − θp | ≈ π , as shown in Fig. 18c. This problem also
occurs in the long edge definition with an angular range of [− π4 , 3π
4 ) when the angular value
is close to − π4 or 3π
.
4

Fig. 17 Comparison between metric and loss (Qian et al. 2021, 2022; Yang et al. 2021). a A sketch of
RIoU change caused by angle and aspect ratio (AR) variation. b and c depict the changes of the regression
loss and RIoU with aspect ratio and angle difference, respectively

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 45 of 61

350

Fig. 18 Illustration of angular boundary discontinuity (Yang et al. 2021). The predicted and GT OBB
are represented by green and blue, respectively. a The ideal form of OBB representation. The two OBBs
only differ slightly in terms of the angle and center point. b OBB representation with OpenCV definition,
encountering PoA and exchangeability of edges (EoE). c OBB representation with long edge definition,
encountering a significant angle difference

For square-like objects, including storage tanks and roundabouts, the long edge definition encounters a so-called square-like problem due to angle parameter differences (Yang
et al. 2021, 2021, 2022). As shown in Fig. 19, when the aspect ratio is close to 1 but the
length and width of the predicted OBB are opposite to those of the GT, the corresponding
angle will differ by approximately π2 , leading to a large regression loss even if the RIoU is
approximately 1.

Appendix B Quadrilateral representation
The quadrilateral representation denotes an OBB as a vector (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , x3 , y3 , x4 , y4 ),
where (xi , yi ) indicates the image coordinates of the ith vertex arranged in a clockwise
order (Xu et al. 2021). This representation sch can compactly enclose oriented objects with
large deformations and has been widely adopted for annotating objects in large-scale RS
datasets, including DOTA (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022) and HRSC2016 (Liu et al.
2016). The top-left vertex relative to the object orientation is chosen as the starting point
(x1 , y1 ), as shown in Fig. 20a.
Under the quadrilateral representation, the detector outputs a vector
(∆xp1 , ∆y1p , ∆xp2 , ∆y2p , ∆xp3 , ∆y3p , ∆xp4 , ∆y4p ), where (∆xpi , ∆yip ) represent the relative offsets between the i-th vertex of the predicted OBB and the corresponding anchor
box. Then, the predicted offsets are used to approximate the GT coordinate offsets
(∆xg1 , ∆y1g , ∆xg2 , ∆y2g , ∆xg3 , ∆y3g , ∆xg4 , ∆y4g ) between the i-th vertex of the GT OBB and

13

350

Page 46 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Fig. 19 Illustration of the square-like problem (Yang et al. 2021)

Fig. 20 Definition of quadrilateral representation. Top the top-left vertex relative to the object orientation
is chosen as the start point. Bottom the leftmost vertex is chosen as the starting point

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 47 of 61

350

Fig. 21 Illustration of vertexes
sorting problem. The dashed
line and solid line represent the
actual and ideal regression forms,
respectively

that of the anchor box. The regression loss of the quadrilateral OBB representation can be
expressed as follows:
Lreg =

4
∑
i=1

[Ln (∆xpi − ∆xgi ) + Ln (∆yip − ∆yig )](B4)

Generally, the anchor box selects the top-left vertex of the input image as the starting point.
To ensure consistency, the leftmost vertices of the predicted OBB and the corresponding GT
OBB are chosen as the starting points, as shown in Fig. 20b. However, an inappropriate vertex
sorting process may cause inconsistencies between the vertex sequences of the anchor and the
GT OBB, which is known as the vertex sorting or the corner sorting problem (Qian et al. 2021,
2022; Xu et al. 2021). Figure 21 shows a case of this problem. The anchor and the GT OBB
are shown in blue and green, respectively, and the dashed and solid lines denote the actual and
ideal vertex matchings during regression, respectively. In the ideal setting, the vertex matchings from the anchor to the GT are as follows:(x1 , y1 ) → (x2 , y2 ) , (x2 , y2 ) → (x3 , y3 ) ,
(x3 , y3 ) → (x4 , y4 ) , and (x4 , y4 ) → (x1 , y1 ). However, in the actual regression case, the vertex matchings are (x1 , y1 ) → (x1 , y1 ) , (x2 , y2 ) → (x2 , y2 ) ,
(x3 , y3 ) → (x3 , y3 ) , and (x4 , y4 ) → (x4 , y4 ). This inconsistency causes a large regression
loss, confusing the network during the training process. Hence, determining the sequence of
vertices in advance is critical for stabilizing the training process.

Appendix C Datasets
In Table 3 of our main paper, we review a series of benchmark datasets for oriented object
detection. However, space constraints prevent us from presenting all of them in detail. In
this section, further details regarding the datasets mentioned in Sect. 7.2 are presented.

13

350

Page 48 of 61

K. Wang et al.

SZTAKI-INRIA (Benedek et al. 2012) contains 665 buildings in 9 multisensor aerial or
satellite images taken from different cities. Owing to its small capacity, this dataset is used
to evaluate traditional object detection algorithms.
3K vehicle (Liu and Mattyus 2015) was created for vehicle detection; it comprises 20
images and 14,235 vehicles. The images have resolutions of 5616 × 3744 and were captured by a DLR camera system at a height of 1,000 m above the ground. Therefore, the
GSD is approximately 13 cm, leading to smaller scale variations. In addition, the images
have similar backgrounds. Hence, this dataset is excluded from the algorithmic evaluation
conducted on complicated scenes.
VEDAI (Razakarivony and Jurie 2016) was also proposed for vehicle detection, as it
contains more categories and a wider variety of backgrounds, e.g., fields, grass, mountains, urban areas, etc., making the detection process more complicated. It comprises 1,210
images with resolutions of 1, 024 × 1, 024. The images were cropped from VHR satellite images with GSDs of 12.5 cm. However, the dataset consists of only 3,640 instances
because images with too many dense vehicles are excluded. Notably, each image has four
color channels, including three visible channels and one 8-bit near-infrared channel.
UCAS-AOD (Zhu et al. 2015) contains 7,482 planes in 1,000 images, 7,114 cars in 510
images, and 910 negative images. All the images in this dataset were cropped from Google
Earth aerial images. In particular, the instances were carefully selected to ensure that their
orientations were distributed evenly.
DOTA (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022). Figure 22 shows the number of instances
contained in each category of the training and validation subsets of DOTA-V1.0, V1.5,
and V2.0. Note that the distributions of different categories are severely imbalanced. The
instances of small vehicles and ships have large quantities. Nearly half of the other categories have quantities of less than 1,000, including planes, baseball diamonds, ground
track fields, basketball courts, soccer ball fields, roundabouts, helicopters, container cranes,
airports and helipads. Severe category imbalances cause models to severely overfit to manyshot categories but underfit to low-shot categories (Gupta et al. 2019; Cui et al. 2019; Wang

Fig. 22 Number of instances for each category in training and validation subsets of DOTA-V1.0, V1.5,
and V2.0 (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022)

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 49 of 61

350

Fig. 23 Size and ratio distributions for each category in training and validation subsets of DOTA-V1.0,
V1.5, and V2.0 (Xia et al. 2018; Ding et al. 2022)

et al. 2021). Figure 23 further summarizes the size and ratio distributions for each category
in the three versions of DOTA. As shown in Fig. 23a, the minimum size is 3 − 4 orders of
magnitude lower than the maximum size for each category. Moreover, a large range of size
differences are observed between various categories. Figure 23b indicates that the aspect
ratios of different categories vary greatly. Furthermore, some categories, such as bridges,
harbors, and airports, have extremely large aspect ratios. To date, DOTA has been the most
challenging dataset for performing oriented object detection because of its large number of
object instances, large aspect ratio, significant size variance, and complicated aerial scenes.
All of these characteristics have made DOTA the de facto benchmark for evaluating the
efficacy of oriented object detectors in recent years.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 12472189 and The Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province under Grant
2022RC1196.
Author contributions Kun Wang, Zi Wang, Zhang Li, and Erting Pan wrote the main manuscript text. Ang Su
contributed to the data analysis, interpretation of results All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives

13

350

Page 50 of 61

K. Wang et al.

4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do
not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The
images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​
t​t​p​:​/​​/​c​r​e​a​​t​i​v​e​c​o​​m​m​o​n​​s​.​o​r​g​​/​l​i​c​e​​n​s​e​s​/​b​​y​-​n​c​​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/.

References
Benedek C, Descombes X, Zerubia J (2012) Building development monitoring in multitemporal remotely
sensed image pairs with stochastic birth-death dynamics. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell
34(1):33–50. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2011.94
Blaschke T, Hay GJ, Kelly M, Lang S, Hofmann P, Addink E, Queiroz Feitosa R, van der Meer F, van der
Werff H, van Coillie F, Tiede D (2014) Geographic object-based image analysis - towards a new paradigm. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 87:180–191. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​1​3​.​​0​9​.​0​1​4
Blaschke T (2010) Object based image analysis for remote sensing. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens
65(1):2–16. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​0​9​.​​0​6​.​0​0​4
Burochin J-P, Vallet B, Brédif M, Mallet C, Brosset T, Paparoditis N (2014) Detecting blind building façades
from highly overlapping wide angle aerial imagery. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 96:193–209. ​h​
t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​1​4​.​​0​7​.​0​1​1
Chavali N, Agrawal H, Mahendru A, Batra D (2016) Object-proposal evaluation protocol is ‘Gameable’. In:
IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 835–844. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​
0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​6​.​9​7​​​​
Chen Z, Chen K, Lin W, See J, Yu H, Ke Y, Yang C (2020) PIOU Loss: Towards accurate oriented object
detection in complex environments. European conference on computer vision, pp 195–211. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​0​3​0​-​5​8​5​5​8​-​7​_​1​2​​​​
Cheng G, Han J (2016) A survey on object detection in optical remote sensing images. ISPRS J Photogramm
Remote Sens 117:11–28. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​1​6​.​​0​3​.​0​1​4
Chollet F (2017) XCEPTION: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. IEEE/CVF Conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, vol 25, pp 1800–1807. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​
7​.​1​9​5​​​​
Cheng G, Han J, Zhou P, Guo L (2014) Multi-class geospatial object detection and geographic image classification based on collection of part detectors. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 98:119–132. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​
/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​1​4​.​​1​0​.​0​0​2
Cui Y, Jia M, Lin T-Y, Song Y, Belongie S (2019) Class-balanced loss based on effective number of samples.
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 9260–9269. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​0​9​4​9​​​​
Cai X, Lai Q, Wang Y, Wang W, Sun Z, Yao Y (2024) Poly kernel inception network for remote sensing detection. IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 27706–27716
Chen Y-C, Li L, Yu L, El Kholy A, Ahmed F, Gan Z, Cheng Y, Liu J (2020) UNITER: Universal image-text
representation learning. Vedaldi A, Bischof H, Brox T, Frahm J-M (ed) European conference on computer vision, pp 104–120
Carion, N., Massa, F., Synnaeve, G., Usunier, N., Kirillov, A., Zagoruyko, S.: End-to-end object detection
with transformers. In: European conference on computer vision, pp 213–229 (2020). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​0​3​0​-​5​8​4​5​2​-​8​_​1​3​​​​
Chen L-C, Papandreou G, Kokkinos I, Murphy K, Yuille AL (2018) DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation
with deep convolutional Nets, Atrous convolution, and fully connected CRFS. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 40(4):834–848. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2699184
Cao J, Pang Y, Xie J, Khan FS, Shao L (2022) From handcrafted to deep features for pedestrian detection:
a survey. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 44(9):4913–4934. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​P​A​M​I​.​2​0​2​
1​.​3​0​7​6​7​3​3​​​​
Cortes C, Vapnik V (1995) Support-vector networks. Mach Learn 20:273–297. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​2​3​/​A​:​1​
0​2​2​6​2​7​4​1​1​4​1​1​​​​

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 51 of 61

350

Cai Z, Vasconcelos N (2018) Cascade R-CNN: Delving into high quality object detection. IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 6154–6162. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​8​.​
0​0​6​4​4​​​​
Cohen TS, Welling M (2016) Group equivariant convolutional networks. In: International conference on
machine learning, pp 2990–2999. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​p​r​o​​c​e​e​d​i​n​​g​s​.​m​​l​r​.​p​r​​e​s​s​/​v​​4​8​/​c​o​h​​e​n​c​1​​6​.​h​t​m​l
Cheng G, Wang J, Li K, Xie X, Lang C, Yao Y, Han J (2022) Anchor-free oriented proposal generator for object
detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2022.3183022
Chen K, Wu M, Liu J, Zhang C (2020) FGSD: A dataset for fine-grained ship detection in high resolution
satellite images. Preprints at 2003–06832
Cheng G, Yuan X, Yao X, Yan K, Zeng Q, Xie X, Han J (2023) Towards large-scale small object detection: survey and benchmarks. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, pp 1–20
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3290594
Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A, Weissenborn D, Zhai X, Unterthiner T, Dehghani M, Minderer M,
Heigold G, Gelly S (2021) An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
scale. In: International conference on learning representations
Duan K, Bai S, Xie L, Qi H, Huang Q, Tian Q (2019) Centernet: Keypoint triplets for object detection. In:
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp 6568–6577 . ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​I​C​C​V​
.​2​0​1​9​.​0​0​6​6​7​​​​
Ding Y, Feng W, Chen C, Guo J, Liu (2024) REG-PTQ: Regression-specialized post-training quantization for
fully quantized object detector. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp 16174–16184. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01531
Dai L, Liu H, Tang H, Wu Z, Song P (2022) AO2-DETR: Arbitrary-oriented object detection transformer.
IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology, pp 1–1. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​C​S​
V​T​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​2​2​2​9​0​6​​​​
Dai J, Qi H, Xiong Y, Li Y, Zhang G, Hu H, Wei Y (2017) Deformable convolutional networks. In: IEEE
international conference on computer vision, pp 764–773. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.89
Dalal N, Triggs B (2005) Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. IEEE computer society
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, vol 1, pp 886–893. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​
P​R​.​2​0​0​5​.​1​7​7​​​​
Duan,C. Wei Z, Zhang, C, Qu S, Wang H (2021) Coarse-grained density map guided object detection in aerial
images. In: IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision workshops, pp 2789–2798. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​
d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​1​​0​9​/​I​C​​C​V​W​5​4​​1​2​0​.​2​0​​2​1​.​0​​0​3​1​3
Ding J, Xue N, Long Y, Xia G-S, Lu Q (2019) Learning ROI transformer for oriented object detection in
aerial images. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 2844–2853.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.00296
Ding J, Xue N, Xia G-S, Bai X, Yang W, Yang MY, Belongie S, Luo J, Datcu M, Pelillo M, Zhang L (2022)
Object detection in aerial images: a large-scale benchmark and challenges. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 44(11):7778–7796. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3117983
Fu R, Chen C, Yan S, Zhang R, Wang X, Chen H (2024) FADL-Net: Frequency-assisted dynamic learning
network for oriented object detection in remote sensing images. IEEE Trans Industr Inf 20(8):9939–
9951. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3378841
Fei-Fei L, Perona P (2005) A Bayesian hierarchical model for learning natural scene categories. IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2:524–531. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​0​5​.​1​6​​​​
Felzenszwalb PF, Girshick RB, McAllester D (2010) Cascade object detection with deformable part models.
In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 2241–2248 . ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​0​.​5​5​3​9​9​0​6​​​​
Felzenszwalb P, McAllester D, Ramanan D (2008) A discriminatively trained, multiscale, deformable part
model. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 1–8. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​0​8​.​4​5​8​7​5​9​7​​​​
Girshick R, Donahue J, Darrell T, Malik J (2014) Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection
and semantic segmentation. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp
580–587. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2014.81
Gupta A, Dollár P, Girshick R (2019) LVIS: A dataset for large vocabulary instance segmentation. In: IEEE/
CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 5351–5359. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​
V​P​R​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​0​5​5​0​​​​
Girshick R (2015) Fast R-CNN. In: IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp 1440–1448.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.169
Guo Z, Liu C, Zhang X, Jiao J, Ji X, Ye Q (2021) Beyond bounding-box: Convex-hull feature adaptation for
oriented and densely packed object detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition (CVPR), pp 8788–8797. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00868

13

350

Page 52 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Gao S, Zhang Y, Huang F, Huang H (2024) Bilevelpruning: Unified dynamic and static channel pruning for
convolutional neural networks. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp 16090–16100. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01523
Guo Z, Zhang X, Liu C, Ji X, Jiao J, Ye Q (2022) Convex-hull feature adaptation for oriented and densely
packed object detection. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 32(8):5252–5265. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​1​0​9​/​T​C​S​V​T​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​4​0​2​4​8​​​​
Gao P, Zheng M, Wang X, Dai J, Li H (2021) Fast convergence of detr with spatially modulated co-attention.
In: IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp 3601–3610. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​I​C​
C​V​4​8​9​2​2​.​2​0​2​1​.​0​0​3​6​0​​​​
Gong M, Zhao H, Wu Y, Tang Z, Feng K-Y, Sheng K (2024) Dual appearance-aware enhancement for oriented object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–14. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​3​
.​3​3​4​4​1​9​5​​​​
Haase D, Amthor M (2020) Rethinking depthwise separable convolutions: How intra-kernel correlations
lead to improved mobilenets. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp
14588–14597. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01461
Hosang J, Benenson R, Dollár P, Schiele B (2016) What makes for effective detection proposals? IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 38(4):814–830. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2015.2465908
Han W, Chen J, Wang L, Feng R, Li F, Wu L, Tian T, Yan J (2021) Methods for small, weak object detection
in optical high-resolution remote sensing images: a survey of advances and challenges. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine 9(4):8–34. https://doi.org/10.1109/MGRS.2020.3041450
He K, Chen X, Xie S, Li Y, Dollár P, Girshick R (2022) Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners.
In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 15979–15988. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​5​2​6​8​8​.​2​0​2​2​.​0​1​5​5​3​​​​
Han J, Ding J, Li J, Xia G-S (2022) Align deep features for oriented object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci
Remote Sens 60:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2021.3062048
Han J, Ding J, Xue N, Xia G-S (2021) Redet: A rotation-equivariant detector for aerial object detection. In:
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 2785–2794 . ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​4​6​4​3​7​.​2​0​2​1​.​0​0​2​8​1​​​​
He K, Gkioxari G, Dollár P, Girshick R (2020) Mask R-CNN. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell
42(2):386–397. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2844175
Hei L, Jia D (2020) Cornernet: Detecting objects as paired keypoints. Int J Comput Vision 128:642–656.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-019-01204-1
Ho J, Jain A, Abbeel P (2020) Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst
33:6840–6851
Hua W, Liang D, Li J, Liu X, Zou Z, Ye X, Bai X (2023) SOOD: Towards semi-supervised oriented object
detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 15558–15567.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.01493
Huang Z, Li W, Xia X-G, Wu X, Cai Z, Tao R (2022) A novel nonlocal-aware pyramid and multiscale multitask refinement detector for object detection in remote sensing images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens
60:1–20. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2021.3059450
Huang Z, Li W, Xia X-G, Wang H, Tao R (2024) Task-wise sampling convolutions for arbitrary-oriented
object detection in aerial images. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, pp 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3367331
Hou L, Lu K, Xue J, Li Y (2022) Shape-adaptive selection and measurement for oriented object detection.
AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol 36, pp 923–932. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​6​0​9​/​a​a​a​i​.​v​3​6​i​1​.​1​9​
9​7​5​​​​
Huang Z, Li W, Xia X-G, Tao R (2022) A general gaussian heatmap label assignment for arbitrary-oriented
object detection. IEEE Trans Image Process 31:1895–1910. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2022.3148874
Hanson SJ, Pratt LY (1988) Comparing biases for minimal network construction with back-propagation. In:
international conference on neural information processing systems, pp 177–185. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​5​5​
5​5​/​2​9​6​9​7​3​5​.​2​9​6​9​7​5​6​​​​
Han S, Pool J, Tran J, Dally WJ (2015) Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural networks.
In: International conference on neural information processing systems, vol 1, pp 1135–1143. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​
i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​5​5​5​5​/​2​9​6​9​2​3​9​.​2​9​6​9​3​6​6​​​​
Hinton GE, Salakhutdinov RR (2006) Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks. Science
313(5786):504–507. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1127647
Hu J, Shen L, Albanie S, Sun G, Wu E (2020) Squeeze-and-excitation networks. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 42(8):2011–2023. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2019.2913372
Hinton G, Vinyals O, Dean J (2015) Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. Preprints at 1503–02531

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 53 of 61

350

Han K, Wang Y, Chen H, Chen X, Guo J, Liu Z, Tang Y, Xiao A, Xu C, Xu Y, Yang Z, Zhang Y, Tao D (2023)
A survey on vision transformer. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 45(1):87–110. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​1​0​9​/​T​P​A​M​I​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​5​2​2​4​7​​​​
Howard AG, Zhu M, Chen B, Kalenichenko D, Wang W, Weyand T, Andreetto M, Adam H (2017)
MobileNets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. Preprints at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​4​8​5​5​0​/​a​r​X​i​v​.​1​7​0​4​.​0​4​8​6​1​​​​
He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 770–778. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90
Khan SD, Alarabi L, Basalamah S (2022) A unified deep learning framework of multi-scale detectors for
geo-spatial object detection in high-resolution satellite images. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, 9489–9504 https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-021-06288-x
Karatzas D, Gomez-Bigorda L, Nicolaou A, Ghosh S, Bagdanov A, Iwamura M, Matas J, Neumann L, Chandrasekhar VR, Lu S, Shafait F, Uchida S, Valveny E (2015) ICDAR 2015 competition on robust reading.
In: International conference on document analysis and recognition, 1156–1160. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​
9​/​I​C​D​A​R​.​2​0​1​5​.​7​3​3​3​9​4​2​​​​
Koyun OC, Keser RK, Akkaya Batuhan, Töreyin BU (2022) Focus-and-detect: a small object detection
framework for aerial images. Signal Process Image Commun 104:116675. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​
m​a​g​e​.​2​0​2​2​.​1​1​6​6​7​5​​​​
Kirillov A, Mintun E, Ravi N, Mao H, Rolland C, Gustafson L, Xiao T, Whitehead S, Berg AC, Lo W-Y,
Dollar P, Girshick R (2023) Segment anything. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference
on computer vision (ICCV), pp 4015–4026
Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2012) Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In: International conference on neural information processing systems, Red Hook, NY, USA,
pp 1097–1105
Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2017) Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Commun ACM 60(6):84–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/3065386
Liu W, Anguelov D, Erhan D, Szegedy C, Reed S, Fu C-Y, Berg AC (2016) SSD: Single shot multibox detector.
In: European conference on computer vision, pp 21–37. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_2
LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature 521:436–444. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​8​/​n​a​t​u​r​e​1​
4​5​3​9​​​​
Li W, Chen Y, Hu K, Zhu J (2022) Oriented reppoints for aerial object detection. In: IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1819–1828. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.00187
Li S, Chen J, Peng W, Shi X, Bu W (2023) A vehicle detection method based on disparity segmentation.
Multim Tools Appl 82:19643–19655. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-023-14360-x
Li Y, Chen Y, Wang N, Zhang Z-X (2019) Scale-aware trident networks for object detection. In: IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision, pp 6053–6062. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2019.00615
Liu F, Chen R, Zhang J, Ding S, Liu H, Ma S, Xing K (2023) ESRTMDET: An end-to-end super-resolution enhanced real-time rotated object detector for degraded aerial images. IEEE J Sel Top Appl Earth
Observ Remote Sens 16:4983–4998. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2023.3278295
Lin T-Y, Dollár P, Girshick R, He K, Hariharan B, Belongie S (2017) Feature pyramid networks for object
detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), pp 936–944.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.106
Lin T-Y, Goyal P, Girshick R, He K, Dollár P (2017) Focal loss for dense object detection. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on computer vision (ICCV), pp 2999–3007. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.324
Lin T-Y, Goyal P, Girshick R, He K, Dollár P (2020) Focal loss for dense object detection. IEEE Trans Pattern
Anal Mach Intell 42(2):318–327. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2858826
Liang D, Geng Q, Wei Z, Vorontsov DA, Kim EL, Wei M, Zhou H (2022) Anchor retouching via model
interaction for robust object detection in aerial images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–13. ​h​t​t​p​s​
:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​1​.​3​1​3​6​3​5​0​​​​
Long Y, Gong Y, Xiao Z, Liu Q (2017) Accurate object localization in remote sensing images based on convolutional neural networks. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 55(5):2486–2498. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​
9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​1​6​.​2​6​4​5​6​1​0​​​​
Leitloff J, Hinz S, Stilla U (2010) Vehicle detection in very high resolution satellite images of city areas. IEEE
Trans Geosci Remote Sens 48(7):2795–2806. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2010.2043109
Lu X, Ji J, Xing Z, Miao Q (2021) Attention and feature fusion SSD for remote sensing object detection.
IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 70:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2021.3052575
Lam D, Kuzma R, McGee K, Dooley S, Laielli M, Klaric M, Bulatov Y, McCord B (2018) xView: Objects
in context in overhead imagery. Preprint at 1802–07856
Liu Z, Lin Y, Cao Y, Hu H, Wei Y, Zhang Z, Lin S, Guo B (2021) Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision
transformer using shifted windows. In: IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp
9992–10002. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00986

13

350

Page 54 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Lu D, Li D, Li Y, Wang S (2022) Oskdet: Orientation-sensitive keypoint localization for rotated object detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 1172–1182. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​5​2​6​8​8​.​2​0​2​2​.​0​0​1​2​5​​​​
Lei S, Lu D, Qiu X, Ding C (2021) SRSDD-v1.0: A high-resolution SAR rotation ship detection dataset.
Remote Sens. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs13245104
Li J, Li D, Savarese S, Hoi S (2023) BLIP-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image
encoders and large language models. In: Krause A, Brunskill E, Cho K, Engelhardt B, Sabato S, Scarlett
J (ed) International conference on machine learning, vol 202, pp 19730–19742
Li J, Li D, Xiong C, Hoi S (2022) BLIP: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified visionlanguage understanding and generation. In: International conference on machine learning, vol 162, pp
12888–12900
Liu Y, Li Q, Yuan Y, Du Q, Wang Q (2022) ABNET: Adaptive balanced network for multiscale object detection in remote sensing imagery. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–14. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​
R​S​.​2​0​2​1​.​3​1​3​3​9​5​6​​​​
Liu S, Li F, Zhang H, Yang X, Qi X, Su H, Zhu J, Zhang L (2022) DAB-DETR: Dynamic anchor boxes are
better queries for DETR. In: International conference on learning representations
Li Y, Luo J, Zhang Y, Tan Y, Yu J-G, Bai S (2024) Learning to holistically detect bridges from large-size VHR
remote sensing imagery. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 46(12):11507–11523. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​0​9​/​T​P​A​M​I​.​2​0​2​4​.​3​3​9​3​0​2​4​​​​
Liu K, Mattyus G (2015) Fast multiclass vehicle detection on aerial images. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett
12(9):1938–1942. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2015.2439517
Liu Z, Mao H, Wu C-Y, Feichtenhofer C, Darrell T, Xie S (2022) A convnet for the 2020s. In: IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 11966–11976. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​
R​5​2​6​8​8​.​2​0​2​2​.​0​1​1​6​7​​​​
Lowe DG (2004) Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. Int J Comput Vision 60:91–110.​
h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​2​3​/​B​:​​V​I​S​I​.​​0​0​0​0​0​2​​9​6​6​4​​.​9​9​6​1​5​.​9​4
Liu L, Ouyang W, Wang X, Fieguth P, Chen J, Liu X, Pietikäinen M (2020) Deep learning for generic object
detection: a survey. Int J Comput Vision 128(2):261–318. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-019-01247-4
Li H, Pan R, Liu G, Dang M, Xu Q, Wang X, Wan B (2024) TIR-NET: Task integration based on rotated convolution kernel for oriented object detection in aerial images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3412167
Lenc K, Vedaldi A (2015) Understanding image representations by measuring their equivariance and equivalence. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 991–999. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​5​.​7​2​9​8​7​0​1​​​​
Li K, Wan G, Cheng G, Meng L, Han J (2020) Object detection in optical remote sensing images: a survey
and a new benchmark. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 159:296–307. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​
r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​1​9​.​​1​1​.​0​2​3
Liu Z, Wang H, Weng L, Yang Y (2016) Ship rotated bounding box space for ship extraction from high-resolution optical satellite images with complex backgrounds. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 13(8):1074–
1078. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2016.2565705
Li B, Xie X, Wei X, Tang W (2021) Ship detection and classification from optical remote sensing images: a
survey. Chin J Aeronaut 34(3):145–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cja.2020.09.022
Luo J, Yang X, Yu Y, Li Q, Yan J, Li Y (2024) Pointobb: Learning oriented object detection via single point
supervision. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 16730–16740
Liu W, Zhang T, Huang S, Li K (2022) A hybrid optimization framework for UAV reconnaissance mission
planning. Comput Ind Eng 173:108653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.108653
Li F, Zhang H, Liu S, Guo J, Ni LM, Zhang L (2022) DN-DETR: Accelerate DETR training by introducing
query denoising. In: IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 13609–
13617. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01325
Liu S, Zhang L, Lu H, He Y (2022) Center-boundary dual attention for oriented object detection in remote
sensing images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2021.3069056
Liao M, Zhu Z, Shi B, Xia G-s, Bai X (2018) Rotation-sensitive regression for oriented scene text detection.
In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 5909–5918. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​0​6​1​9​​​​
Li W, Zhao D, Yuan B, Gao Y, Shi Z (2024) PETDET: Proposal enhancement for two-stage fine-grained object
detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2023.3343453
Liang X, Zhang J, Zhuo L, Li Y, Tian Q (2020) Small object detection in unmanned aerial vehicle images
using feature fusion and scaling-based single shot detector with spatial context analysis. IEEE Trans
Circuits Syst Video Technol 30(6):1758–1770. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2019.2905881

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 55 of 61

350

Ma W, Li N, Zhu H, Jiao L, Tang X, Guo Y, Hou B (2022) Feature split-merge-enhancement network for
remote sensing object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–17. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​
R​S​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​4​0​8​5​6​​​​
Ma T, Mao M, Zheng H, Gao P, Wang X, Han S, Ding E, Zhang B, Doermann D (2021) Oriented object
detection with transformer. Preprint at 2106–03146
Ming Q, Miao L, Zhou Z, Song J, Pizurica A (2024) Gradient calibration loss for fast and accurate oriented
bounding box regression. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–15. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​
2​4​.​3​3​6​7​2​9​4​​​​
Ming Q, Miao L, Zhou Z, Dong Y (2022) CFC-Net: A critical feature capturing network for arbitrary-oriented
object detection in remote-sensing images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–14. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​1​.​3​0​9​5​1​8​6​​​​
Ma J, Shao W, Ye H, Wang L, Wang H, Zheng Y, Xue X (2018) Arbitrary-oriented scene text detection via
rotation proposals. IEEE Trans Multimedia 20(11):3111–3122. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​M​M​.​2​0​1​8​.​2​8​
1​8​0​2​0​​​​
Marcos D, Volpi M, Komodakis N, Tuia D (2017) Rotation equivariant vector field networks. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 5058–5067. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.540
Ming Q, Zhou Z, Miao L, Zhang H, Li L (2021) Dynamic anchor learning for arbitrary-oriented object detection. AAAI Conf Artif Intell 35:2355–2363. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i3.16336
Nie G, Huang H (2023) Multi-oriented object detection in aerial images with double horizontal rectangles.
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 45(4):4932–4944. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3191753
Newell A, Yang K, Deng J (2016) Stacked hourglass networks for human pose estimation. In: Leibe B, Matas
J, Sebe N, Welling M (ed) European conference on computer vision, pp 483–499. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​3​1​9​-​4​6​4​8​4​-​8​_​2​9​​​​
Osco LP, dos Santos de Arruda M, Gonçalves DN, Dias A, Batistoti J, de Souza M, Gomes FDG, Ramos
APM, de Castro Jorge LA, Liesenberg V, Li J, Ma L, Marcato J, Gonçalves WN, (2021) A CNN
approach to simultaneously count plants and detect plantation-rows from UAV imagery. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 174:1–17. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​2​1​.​​0​1​.​0​2​4
Pannone SAACCLFGRMM (2022) Few-shot object detection: a survey. ACM Comput Surv 54:1–37
Pan X, Ren Y, Sheng K, Dong W, Yuan H, Guo X, Ma C, Xu C (2020) Dynamic refinement network for
oriented and densely packed object detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp 11204–11213. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01122
Pu Y, Wang Y, Xia Z, Han Y, Wang Y, Gan W, Wang Z, Song S, Huang G (2023) Adaptive rotated convolution
for rotated object detection. IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp 6566–6577.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.00606
Qiao S, Chen L-C, Yuille A (2021) Detectors: Detecting objects with recursive feature pyramid and switchable atrous convolution. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp
10208–10219. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01008
Qiao Y, Miao L, Zhou Z, Ming Q (2023) A novel object detector based on high-quality rotation proposal
generation and adaptive angle optimization. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 61:1–15. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​3​.​3​3​0​1​6​1​0​​​​
Qian X, Wu B, Cheng G, Yao X, Wang W, Han J (2023) Building a bridge of bounding box regression
between oriented and horizontal object detection in remote sensing images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote
Sens 61:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2023.3256373
Qian W, Yang X, Peng S, Yan J, Guo Y (2021) Learning modulated loss for rotated object detection. AAAI
Conf Artif Intell 35:2458–2466. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i3.16347
Qian W, Yang X, Peng S, Zhang X, Yan J (2022) Rsdet++: Point-based modulated loss for more accurate
rotated object detection. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 32(11):7869–7879. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​0​9​/​T​C​S​V​T​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​8​6​0​7​0​​​​
Redmon J, Divvala S, Girshick R, Farhadi A (2016) You only look once: Unified, real-time object detection.
In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 779–788 . ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​6​.​9​1​​​​
Russakovsky O, Deng J, Su H, Krause J, Satheesh S, Ma S, Huang Z, Karpathy A, Khosla A, Bernstein
M, Berg AC, Fei-Fei L (2015) Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. Int J Comput Vision
115:211–252. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y
Redmon J, Farhadi A (2017) Yolo9000: Better, faster, stronger. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp 6517–6525. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.690
Ren S, He K, Girshick R, Sun J (2015) Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst 39:28
Ren S, He K, Girshick R, Sun J (2017) Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 39(6):1137–1149. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​P​A​M​
I​.​2​0​1​6​.​2​5​7​7​0​3​1​​​​

13

350

Page 56 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Razakarivony S, Jurie F (2016) Vehicle detection in aerial imagery: a small target detection benchmark. J Vis
Commun Image Represent 34:187–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvcir.2015.11.002
Radford A, Kim JW, Hallacy C, Ramesh A, Goh G, Agarwal S, Sastry G, Askell A, Mishkin P, Clark J,
Krueger G, Sutskever I (2021) Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision.
Int Conf Mach Learn 139:8748–8763
Rezatofighi H, Tsoi N, Gwak J, Sadeghian A, Reid I, Savarese S (2019) Generalized intersection over union:
A metric and a loss for bounding box regression. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp 658–666. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.00075
Sun Z, Cao S, Yang Y, Kitani K (2021) Rethinking transformer-based set prediction for object detection. In:
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp 3591–3600. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​I​C​C​V​
4​8​9​2​2​.​2​0​2​1​.​0​0​3​5​9​​​​
Sun Y, Cao B, Zhu P, Hu Q (2022) Drone-based RGB-infrared cross-modality vehicle detection via uncertainty-aware learning. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 32(10):6700–6713. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
1​0​9​/​T​C​S​V​T​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​6​8​2​7​9​​​​
Singh B, Davis LS (2018) An analysis of scale invariance in object detection - snip. In: IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 3578–3587. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00377
Song G, Liu Y, Wang X (2020) Revisiting the sibling head in object detector. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 11560–11569. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01158
Sifre L, Mallat S (2013) Rotation, scaling and deformation invariant scattering for texture discrimination. In:
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 1233–1240. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​3​.​1​6​3​​​​
Song H, Mao H, Dally WJ (2016) Deep compression: compressing deep neural networks with pruning,
trained quantization and Huffman coding. Int Conf Learn Represent
Singh B, Najibi M, Davis LS (2018) Sniper: efficient multi-scale training. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst 31​
h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​p​r​o​​c​e​e​d​i​n​​g​s​.​n​​e​u​r​i​p​​s​.​c​c​/​​p​a​p​e​r​/​​2​0​1​8​​/​f​i​l​e​​/​1​6​6​c​​e​e​7​2​e​9​​3​a​9​9​​2​0​0​7​a​​8​9​b​3​9​​e​b​2​9​6​2​​8​b​-​P​​a​p​e​r​.​p​d​f
Shermeyer J, Van Etten A (2019) The effects of super-resolution on object detection performance in satellite imagery. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp
1432–1441. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2019.00184
Sun X, Wang P, Yan Z, Xu F, Wang R, Diao W, Chen J, Li J, Feng Y, Xu T, Weinmann M, Hinz S, Wang
C, Fu K (2022) FAIR1M: A benchmark dataset for fine-grained object recognition in high-resolution
remote sensing imagery. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 184:116–130. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​
p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​2​1​.​​1​2​.​0​0​4
Sun P, Zheng Y, Wu W, Xu W, Bai S, Lu X (2024) Learning critical features for arbitrary-oriented object
detection in remote-sensing optical images. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 73:1–12. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​
9​/​T​I​M​.​2​0​2​4​.​3​3​7​8​2​6​5​​​​
Tian S, Kang L, Xing X, Tian J, Fan C, Zhang Y (2022) A relation-augmented embedded graph attention
network for remote sensing object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–18. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​1​.​3​0​7​3​2​6​9​​​​
Tian Z, Shen C, Chen H, He T (2019) FCOS: Fully convolutional one-stage object detection. In: 2019 IEEE/
CVF international conference on computer vision (ICCV), pp 9626–9635. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​I​C​C​
V​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​0​9​7​2​​​​
Tarvainen A, Valpola H (2017) Mean teachers are better role models: weight-averaged consistency targets
improve semi-supervised deep learning results. In: International conference on neural information processing systems, pp 1195–1204. https://doi.org/10.5555/3294771.3294885
Tian Y, Zhang M, Li J, Li Y, Yang H, Li W (2024) FPNFORMER: Rethink the method of processing the
rotation-invariance and rotation-equivariance on arbitrary-oriented object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci
Remote Sens 62:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3351156
Viola P, Jones M (2001) Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple features. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, vol 1. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2001.990517
Viola P, Jones MJ (2004) Robust real-time face detection. Int J Comput Vision 57:137–154. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​
0​.​1​0​​2​3​/​B​:​​V​I​S​I​.​​0​0​0​0​0​1​​3​0​8​7​​.​4​9​2​6​0​.​f​b
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser L, Polosukhin I (2017) Attention
is all you need. Int Conf Neural Inform Process Syst 30:6000–6010
Weiler M, Cesa G (2019) General E(2)-equivariant steerable CNNS. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst 32. ​h​t​t​
p​s​:​​/​/​p​r​o​​c​e​e​d​i​n​​g​s​.​n​​e​u​r​i​p​​s​.​c​c​/​​p​a​p​e​r​/​​2​0​1​9​​/​f​i​l​e​​/​4​5​d​6​​6​3​7​b​7​1​​8​d​0​f​​2​4​a​2​3​​7​0​6​9​f​​e​4​1​b​0​d​​b​4​-​P​​a​p​e​r​.​p​d​f
Wen L, Cheng Y, Fang Y, Li X (2023) A comprehensive survey of oriented object detection in remote sensing
images. Expert Syst Appl 224:119960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.119960
Wang J, Chen Y, Zheng Z, Li X, Cheng M-M, Hou Q (2024) Crosskd: Cross-head knowledge distillation
for object detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 16520–
16530. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01563

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 57 of 61

350

Wang C, Guo G, Liu C, Shao D, Gao S (2024) Effective rotate: learning rotation-robust prototype for aerial
object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3374880
Worrall DE, Garbin SJ, Turmukhambetov D, Brostow GJ (2017) Harmonic networks: deep translation and
rotation equivariance. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 7168–
7177. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.758
Weiler M, Hamprecht FA, Storath M (2018) Learning steerable filters for rotation equivariant CNNS. In:
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 849–858. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​
9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​0​0​9​5​​​​
Wang J, Li F, Bi H (2022) Gaussian focal loss: learning distribution polarized angle prediction for rotated
object detection in aerial images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–13. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​
G​R​S​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​7​5​5​2​0​​​​
Wu X, Li W, Hong D, Tao R, Du Q (2022) Deep learning for unmanned aerial vehicle-based object detection
and tracking: a survey. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Mag 10(1):91–124. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​M​G​R​S​.​
2​0​2​1​.​3​1​1​5​1​3​7​​​​
Wu X, Sahoo D, Hoi SCH (2020) Recent advances in deep learning for object detection. Neurocomputing
396:39–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.01.085
Wang J, Teng X, Li Z, Yu Q, Bian Y, Wei J (2022) VSAI: A multi-view dataset for vehicle detection in complex scenarios using aerial images. Drones. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones6070161
Wang Z, Wang C, Li X, Xia C, Xu J (2025) MLP-Net: Multilayer perceptron fusion network for infrared
small target detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 63:1–13. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​4​
.​3​5​1​5​6​4​8​​​​
Wu W, Wong H-S, Wu S (2024) Pseudo-Siamese teacher for semi-supervised oriented object detection. IEEE
Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3380645
Wu W, Wong H-S, Wu S, Zhang T (2024) Relational matching for weakly semi-supervised oriented object
detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
(CVPR), pp 27800–27810
Wang K, Xiao Z, Wan Q, Xia F, Chen P, Li D (2024) Global focal learning for semi-supervised oriented object
detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2024.3438844
Wright J, Yang AY, Ganesh A, Sastry SS, Ma Y (2009) Robust face recognition via sparse representation.
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 31(2):210–227. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2008.79
Wei H, Zhang Y, Chang Z, Li H, Wang H, Sun X (2020) Oriented objects as pairs of middle lines. ISPRS J
Photogramm Remote Sens 169:268–279. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​2​0​.​​0​9​.​0​2​2
Wei S, Zeng X, Qu Q, Wang M, Su H, Shi J (2020) HRSID: A high-resolution SAR images dataset for ship
detection and instance segmentation. IEEE Access 8:120234–120254. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​A​C​C​E​S​
S​.​2​0​2​0​.​3​0​0​5​8​6​1​​​​
Wu Y, Zhang K, Wang J, Wang Y, Wang Q, Li X (2022) GCWNet: A global context-weaving network for
object detection in remote sensing images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–12. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​5​5​8​9​9​​​​
Wang D, Zhang Q, Xu Y, Zhang J, Du B, Tao D, Zhang L (2022) Advancing plain vision transformer towards
remote sensing foundation model. IEEE transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, pp 1–1 ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​2​2​2​8​1​8​​​​
Wang Y, Zhang Z, Xu W, Chen L, Wang G, Yan L, Zhong S, Zou X (2024) Learning oriented object detection
via naive geometric computing. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 35(8):10513–10525. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​N​N​L​S​.​2​0​2​3​.​3​2​4​2​3​2​3​​​​
Wang T, Zhu Y, Zhao C, Zeng W, Wang J, Tang M (2021) Adaptive class suppression loss for long-tail object
detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 3102–3111. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​4​6​4​3​7​.​2​0​2​1​.​0​0​3​1​2​​​​
Xia G-S, Bai X, Ding J, Zhu Z, Belongie S, Luo J, Datcu M, Pelillo M, Zhang L (2018) Dota: A large-scale
dataset for object detection in aerial images. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp 3974–3983. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00418
Xie X, Cheng G, Rao C, Lang C, Han J (2024) Oriented object detection via contextual dependence mining
and penalty-incentive allocation. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–10. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​
G​R​S​.​2​0​2​4​.​3​3​8​5​9​8​5​​​​
Xie X, Cheng G, Wang J, Yao X, Han J (2021) Oriented r-cnn for object detection. In: IEEE/CVF International conference on computer vision, pp 3500–3509. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00350
Xu C, Ding J, Wang J, Yang W, Yu H, Yu L, Xia G-S (2023) Dynamic coarse-to-fine learning for oriented tiny
object detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 7318–7328.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.00707
Xu Y, Fu M, Wang Q, Wang Y, Chen K, Xia G-S, Bai X (2021) Gliding vertex on the horizontal bounding
box for multi-oriented object detection. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 43(4):1452–1459. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​P​A​M​I​.​2​0​2​0​.​2​9​7​4​7​4​5​​​​

13

350

Page 58 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Xie S, Girshick R, Dollár P, Tu Z, He K (2017) Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 5987–5995. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​7​.​6​3​4​​​​
Xiong Y, Liu H, Gupta S, Akin B, Bender G, Wang Y, Kindermans P-J, Tan M, Singh V, Chen B (2021)
Mobiledets: Searching for object detection architectures for mobile accelerators. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 3824–3833. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​4​6​4​3​7​
.​2​0​2​1​.​0​0​3​8​2​​​​
Xu S, Li Y, Lin M, Gao P, Guo G, Lü J, Zhang B (2023) Q-DETR: An efficient low-bit quantized detection
transformer. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 3842–3851.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.00374
Xiao Z, Liu Q, Tang G, Zhai X (2015) Elliptic Fourier transformation-based histograms of oriented gradients
for rotationally invariant object detection in remote-sensing images. Int J Remote Sens 36(2):618–644.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2014.999881
Xu Y, Zhang Q, Zhang J, Tao D (2021) Vitae: Vision transformer advanced by exploring intrinsic inductive
bias. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst 34 https://openreview.net/pdf?id=_RnHyIeu5Y5
Yao Y, Cheng G, Lang C, Yuan X, Xie X, Han J Hierarchical mask prompting and robust integrated regression for oriented object detection. IEEE transactions on circuits and systems for video technology, pp
1–1 https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3444795
Yao Y, Cheng G, Wang G, Li S, Zhou P, Xie X, Han J (2023) On improving bounding box representations
for oriented object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 61:1–11. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​
.​2​0​2​2​.​3​2​3​1​3​4​0​​​​
Ye Q, Doermann D (2015) Text detection and recognition in imagery: a survey. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal
Mach Intell 37(7):1480–1500. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2014.2366765
Yu Y, Da F (2023) Phase-shifting coder: Predicting accurate orientation in oriented object detection. In:
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 13354–13363. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​5​2​7​2​9​.​2​0​2​3​.​0​1​2​8​3​​​​
Yu Y, Da F (2024) On boundary discontinuity in angle regression based arbitrary oriented object detection.
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 46(10):6494–6508. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3378777
Yang, X., Hou, L., Zhou, Y., Wang, W., Yan, J.: Dense label encoding for boundary discontinuity free rotation detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 15814–15824
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01556
Yang, Z., Liu, S., Hu, H., Wang, L., Lin, S.: Reppoints: Point set representation for object detection. In: IEEE/
CVF international conference on computer vision, pp 9656–9665 (2019). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​I​C​C​
V​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​0​9​7​5​​​​
Ye T, Qin W, Li Y, Wang S, Zhang J, Zhao Z (2022) Dense and small object detection in UAV-vision based
on a global-local feature enhanced network. IEEE Trans Instrument Meas 71:1–13. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​1​0​9​/​T​I​M​.​2​0​2​2​.​3​1​9​6​3​1​9​​​​
Yang X, Sun H, Fu K, Yang J, Sun X, Yan M, Guo Z (2018) Automatic ship detection in remote sensing
images from google earth of complex scenes based on multiscale rotation dense feature pyramid networks. Remote Sens. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10010132
Yu H, Tian Y, Ye Q, Liu Y (2024) Spatial transform decoupling for oriented object detection. AAAI Conf
Artif Intell 38:6782–6790. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i7.28502
Yang X, Yan J (2020) Arbitrary-oriented object detection with circular smooth label. In: European conference
on computer vision, pp 677–694. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58598-3_40
Yang X, Yan J, He Feng T Z (2021) R3DET: Refined single-stage detector with feature refinement for rotating
object. AAAI Conf Artif Intell 35:3163–3171. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i4.16426
Yang X, Yan J, Liao W, Yang X, Tang J, He T (2022) Scrdet++: Detecting small, cluttered and rotated objects
via instance-level feature denoising and rotation loss smoothing. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, pp 1–1 https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3166956
Yu Y, Yang X, Li Q, Zhou Y, Da F, Yan J (2023) H2rbox-v2: Incorporating symmetry for boosting horizontal
box supervised oriented object detection. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst 36:59137–59150. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​p​
r​o​​c​e​e​d​i​n​​g​s​.​n​​e​u​r​i​p​​s​.​c​c​/​​p​a​p​e​r​_​​f​i​l​e​​s​/​p​a​p​​e​r​/​2​0​​2​3​/​f​i​l​​e​/​b​9​​6​0​3​d​e​​9​e​4​9​d​​0​8​3​8​e​5​​3​b​6​c​​9​c​f​9​d​​0​6​5​5​6​​-​P​a​p​e​r​​-​C​o​n​​f​e​
r​e​n​c​e​.​p​d​f
Yu Y, Yang X, Li Q, Da F, Dai J, Qiao Y, Yan,J (2024) Point2rbox: Combine knowledge from synthetic visual
patterns for end-to-end oriented object detection with single point supervision. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 16783–16793
Yu Y, Yang X, Li J, Gao X (2023) Task-specific heterogeneous network for object detection in aerial images.
IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 61:1–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2023.3311966
Yang, X., Yan, J., Ming, Q., Wang, W., Zhang, X., Tian, Q (2021) Rethinking rotated object detection with
Gaussian Wasserstein distance loss. Int Conf Mach Learn 139:11830–11841. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​p​r​o​​c​e​e​d​i​n​​g​s​.​m​​l​r​.​p​
r​​e​s​s​/​v​​1​3​9​/​y​a​​n​g​2​1​​l​.​h​t​m​l

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 59 of 61

350

Yang X, Yang J, Yan J, Zhang Y, Zhang T, Guo Z, Sun X, Fu K (2019) Scrdet: Towards more robust detection
for small, cluttered and rotated objects. In: IEEE/CVF International conference on computer vision, pp
8231–8240. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2019.00832
Yang X, Yang X, Yang J, Ming Q, Wang W, Tian Q, Yan J (2021) Learning high-precision bounding box for
rotated object detection via Kullback–Leibler divergence. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst 34:18381–
18394. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​p​r​o​​c​e​e​d​i​n​​g​s​.​n​​e​u​r​i​p​​s​.​c​c​/​​p​a​p​e​r​/​​2​0​2​1​​/​f​i​l​e​​/​9​8​f​1​​3​7​0​8​2​1​​0​1​9​4​​c​4​7​5​6​​8​7​b​e​6​​1​0​6​a​3​b​​8​4​-​P​​a​p​e​r​.​p​d​
f
Yang X, Zhang G, Li W, Wang X, Zhou Y, Yan J (2023) H2RBox: horizontal box annotation is all you need
for oriented object detection. Int Conf Learn Represent
Yang X, Zhang G, Yang X, Zhou Y, Wang W, Tang J, He T, Yan J (2022) Detecting rotated objects as Gaussian distributions and its 3-D generalization. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, pp 1–18 https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3197152
Yang X, Zhou Y, Zhang G, Yang J, Wang W, Yan J, Zhang X, Tian Q (2022) The KFIoU loss for rotated object
detection. Preprint at 2201–12558
Zhu H, Chen X, Dai W, Fu K, Ye Q, Jiao J (2015) Orientation robust object detection in aerial images using
deep convolutional neural network. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on image processing, pp
3735–3739. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIP.2015.7351502
Zhou L, Cai J, Ding S (2023) The identification of ice floes and calculation of sea ice concentration based on
a deep learning method. Remote Sens. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15102663
Zhuang J, Chen W, Guo B, Yan Y (2024) Infrared weak target detection in dual images and dual areas.
Remote Sens. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs16193608
Zou Z, Chen K, Shi Z, Guo Y, Ye J (2023) Object detection in 20 years: a survey. Proc IEEE 111(3):257–276.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2023.3238524
Zhang, S., Chi, C., Yao, Y, Lei Z, Li SZ (2020) Bridging the gap between anchor-based and anchor-free detection via adaptive training sample selection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp 9756–9765. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00978
Zeng Y, Chen Y, Yang X, Li Q, Yan J (2024) ARS-DETR: Aspect ratio-sensitive detection transformer for
aerial oriented object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–15. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​
R​S​.​2​0​2​4​.​3​3​6​4​7​1​3​​​​
Zhu Y, Du J, Wu X (2020) Adaptive period embedding for representing oriented objects in aerial images.
IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 58(10):7247–7257. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2020.2981203
Zhou, H., Ge, Z., Liu S, Mao W, Li Z, Yu H, Sun J (2022) Dense teacher: Dense pseudo-labels for semisupervised object detection. In: Avidan S, Brostow G, Cissé M, Farinella GM, Hassner T (ed) European
conference on computer vision, pp 35–50
Zhang Z, Guo W, Zhu S, Yu W (2018) Toward arbitrary-oriented ship detection with rotated region proposal
and discrimination networks. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 15(11):1745–1749. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​
0​9​/​L​G​R​S​.​2​0​1​8​.​2​8​5​6​9​2​1​​​​
Zhang D, Han J, Cheng G, Yang M-H (2022) Weakly supervised object localization and detection: a survey.
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 44(9):5866–5885. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3074313
Zhang H, Liu L, Huang Y, Yang Z, Lei X, We B (2024) CAKDP: Category-aware knowledge distillation and
pruning framework for lightweight 3d object detection. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp 15331–15341. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01452
Zhang H, Li F, Liu S, Zhang L, Su H, Zhu J, Ni LM, Shum H-Y (2022) DINO: DETR with improved DeNoising Anchor boxes for end-to-end object detection. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.03605
Zhang J, Lei J, Xie W, Fang Z, Li Y, Du Q (2023) Superyolo: Super resolution assisted object detection in
multimodal remote sensing imagery. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 61:1–15. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​
9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​3​.​3​2​5​8​6​6​6​​​​
Zhang S, Long J, Xu Y, Mei S (2024) PMHO: Point-supervised oriented object detection based on segmentation-driven proposal generation. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–18. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​
G​R​S​.​2​0​2​4​.​3​4​5​0​7​3​2​​​​
Zhang M, Qiu H, Mei H, Wang L, Meng F, Xu L, Li H (2023) DRDET: Dual-angle rotated line representation for oriented object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 61:1–13. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​
G​R​S​.​2​0​2​3​.​3​3​1​1​8​7​0​​​​
Zou Z, Shi Z (2018) Random access memories: a new paradigm for target detection in high resolution aerial
remote sensing images. IEEE Trans Image Process 27(3):1100–1111. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​I​P​.​2​0​1​7​
.​2​7​7​3​1​9​9​​​​
Zhu X, Su W, Lu L, Li B, Wang X, Dai J (2021) Deformable DETR: Deformable transformers for end-to-end
object detection. Int Conf Learn Represent
Zheng S, Wu Z, Du Q, Xu Y, Wei Z (2024) Oriented object detection for remote sensing images via objectwise rotation-invariant semantic representation. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 62:1–15. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​4​.​3​4​0​2​8​2​5​​​​

13

350

Page 60 of 61

K. Wang et al.

Zheng Z, Wang P, Liu W, Li J, Ye R, Ren D (2020) Distance-IOU loss: Faster and better learning for bounding box regression. AAAI Conf Artif Intell 34:12993–13000. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v34i07.6999
Zhang F, Wang X, Zhou S, Wang Y, Hou Y (2022) Arbitrary-oriented ship detection through center-head point
extraction. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2021.3120411
Zhao F, Xia L, Kylling A, Li RQ, Shang H, Xu M (2018) Detection flying aircraft from Landsat 8 OLI data.
ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 141:176–184. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​1​8​.​​0​5​.​0​0​1
Zhang C, Xiong B, Li X, Kuang G (2023) TCD: Task-collaborated detector for oriented objects in remote
sensing images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 61:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2023.3244953
Zhang Q, Xu Y, Zhang J, Tao D (2023) VITAEV2: Vision transformer advanced by exploring inductive bias
for image recognition and beyond. Int J Comput Vis, pp 1573–1405 ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​2​6​3​-​0​
2​2​-​0​1​7​3​9​-​w​​​​
Zhang Y, Yuan Y, Feng Y, Lu X (2019) Hierarchical and robust convolutional neural network for very highresolution remote sensing object detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 57(8):5535–5548. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​1​9​.​2​9​0​0​3​0​2​​​​
Zheng Z, Ye R, Hou Q, Ren D, Wang P, Zuo W, Cheng M-M (2023) Localization distillation for object detection. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 45(8):10070–10083. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​P​A​M​I​.​2​0​2​3​.​3​
2​4​8​5​8​3​​​​
Zhou Y, Ye Q, Qiu Q, Jiao J (2017) Oriented response networks. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp 4961–4970. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.527
Zhou Y, Yang X, Zhang G, Wang J, Liu Y, Hou L, Jiang X, Liu X, Yan J, Lyu C, Zhang W, Chen K
(2022) MMRotate: a rotated object detection benchmark using PyTorch. ACM Int Conf Multim doi
10(1145/3503161):3548541
Zhang T, Zhuang Y, Chen H, Wang G, Ge L, Chen L, Dong H, Li L (2023) Posterior instance injection detector for arbitrary-oriented object detection from optical remote-sensing imagery. IEEE Trans Geosci
Remote Sens 61:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2023.3327123
Zhou X, Zhuo J, Krähenbühl P (2019) Bottom-up object detection by grouping extreme and center points.
In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 850–859. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​1​0​9​/​C​V​P​R​.​2​0​1​9​.​0​0​0​9​4​​​​
Zhang T, Zhang X, Liu C, Shi J, Wei S, Ahmad I, Zhan X, Zhou Y, Pan D, Li J, Su H (2021) Balance learning
for ship detection from synthetic aperture radar remote sensing imagery. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote
Sens 182:190–207. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​i​s​p​r​s​​j​p​r​s​.​2​​0​2​1​.​​1​0​.​0​1​0
Zhang X, Zhou X, Lin M, Sun, J (2018) Shufflenet: an extremely efficient convolutional neural network for
mobile devices. In: IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp 6848–6856.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00716
Zhang Z, Zhang L, Wang Y, Feng P, He R (2021) ShipRSImageNet: A large-scale fine-grained dataset for
ship detection in high-resolution optical remote sensing images. IEEE J Select Top Appl Earth Observ
Remote Sens 14:8458–8472. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3104230
Zhang X, Zhang T, Wang G, Zhu P, Tang X, Jia X, Jiao L (2023) Remote sensing object detection meets deep
learning: a metareview of challenges and advances. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Mag 11(4):8–44. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​
/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​M​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​3​.​3​3​1​2​3​4​7​​​​
Zhao Z-Q, Zheng P, Xu S-T, Wu X (2019) Object detection with deep learning: a review. IEEE Trans Neural
Netw Learn Syst 30(11):3212–3232. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2018.2876865
Zhang T, Zhang X, Zhu P, Chen P, Tang X, Li C, Jiao L (2022) Foreground refinement network for rotated
object detection in remote sensing images. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–13. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​9​/​T​G​R​S​.​2​0​2​1​.​3​1​0​9​1​4​5​​​​
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Authors and Affiliations
Kun Wang1,2 · Zi Wang1,2 · Zhang Li1,2 · Ang Su1,2 · Xichao Teng1,2 · Erting Pan1,2 ·
Minhao Liu3 · Qifeng Yu1,2
Zhang Li
lizhang08@nudt.edu.cn

13

Oriented object detection in optical remote sensing images using deep…

Page 61 of 61

350

Kun Wang
wangkun21@nudt.edu.cn
Zi Wang
wangzi16@nudt.edu.cn
Ang Su
suang@nudt.edu.cn
Xichao Teng
tengari@buaa.edu.cn
Erting Pan
panerting@whu.edu.cn
Minhao Liu
lmh313@nudt.edu.cn
Qifeng Yu
yuqifeng@nudt.edu.cn
1

College of Aerospace Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology,
Deya Road, Changsha 410000, Hunan Province, China

2

Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Image Measurement and Vision Navigation, National
University of Defense Technology, Deya Road, Changsha 410000, Hunan Province, China

3

Videogrammetry Innovation Center, Hunan Institute of Advanced Technology, Qingshan
Road, Changsha 410000, Hunan Province, China

13

