1

Deep Learning based Computer Vision Methods for
Complex Traffic Environments Perception: A
Review

arXiv:2211.05120v1 [cs.CV] 9 Nov 2022

Talha Azfar Student Member, IEEE, Jinlong Li, Hongkai Yu, Ruey Long Cheu Senior Member, IEEE,
Yisheng Lv Senior Member, IEEE, and Ruimin Ke Member, IEEE

Abstract—Computer vision applications in intelligent transportation systems (ITS) and autonomous driving (AD) have
gravitated towards deep neural network architectures in recent
years. While performance seems to be improving on benchmark
datasets, many real-world challenges are yet to be adequately
considered in research. This paper conducted an extensive
literature review on the applications of computer vision in ITS
and AD, and discusses challenges related to data, models, and
complex urban environments. The data challenges are associated
with the collection and labeling of training data and its relevance
to real world conditions, bias inherent in datasets, the high
volume of data needed to be processed, and privacy concerns.
Deep learning (DL) models are commonly too complex for realtime processing on embedded hardware, lack explainability and
generalizability, and are hard to test in real-world settings.
Complex urban traffic environments have irregular lighting and
occlusions, and surveillance cameras can be mounted at a variety
of angles, gather dirt, shake in the wind, while the traffic
conditions are highly heterogeneous, with violation of rules and
complex interactions in crowded scenarios. Some representative
applications that suffer from these problems are traffic flow
estimation, congestion detection, autonomous driving perception,
vehicle interaction, and edge computing for practical deployment.
The possible ways of dealing with the challenges are also explored
while prioritizing practical deployment.
Index Terms—deep learning, intelligent transportation systems,
computer vision, autonomous driving, complex traffic environment

I. I NTRODUCTION
Video cameras have been used to monitor traffic and provide
valuable information to traffic management center (TMC)
operators. The manual process of having TMC operators
observe numerous video screens has given way to automated
and semi-automated computer vision approaches for faster
processing and response times with some humans in the loop
to interpret and verify the data. Artificial neural networks
are being increasingly used in computer vision in ITS and
autonomous driving (AD) applications, showing benefits in
Talha Azfar is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, 79968 USA, e-mail:
tazfar@miners.utep.edu. Jinlong Li and Hongkai Yu are with Cleveland State
University, Cleveland, OH 44115 USA, e-mails: j.li56@vikes.csuohio.edu
and h.yu19@csuohio.edu. Ruey Long Cheu and Ruimin Ke are with the
Department of Civil Engineering, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso,
TX, 79968 USA, e-mails: rcheu@utep.edu and rke@utep.edu. Yisheng Lv
is with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
100190 China, e-mail: yisheng.lv@ia.ac.cn
This work was supported in part by NSF 2215388.
* Corresponding author: Ruimin Ke, e-mail: rke@utep.edu

Fig. 1. Applications of deep learning based computer vision methods in
transportation and associated challenges in real world deployment.

traffic monitoring, traffic flow estimation, incident detection,
etc. However, the use of deep neural networks (DNN) brings
some issues and concerns that should be studied in further
detail as they need to be more accurate, more reliable, and
practical enough for large-scale deployment as part of ITS
infrastructure or in autonomous vehicles.
Deep learning (DL) refers to machine learning architectures
of multiple layers such as large (deep) neural networks spanning many layers in a variety of configurations. Advances in
computational hardware and algorithmic efficiency have made
DL popular in every field that deals with big data. DNNs have
been applied to solve computer vision problems such as object
detection, classification, motion tracking, and prediction [1].
ITS and AD researchers have adapted these models, training
them for specific use cases with specially curated datasets and
benchmarks such as KITTI [2] and AI City [3].
Automated analysis of traffic surveillance videos in ITS
systems is important for incident and congestion management,
while perception in autonomous vehicles is critical for vehicle
control and navigation. Computer vision algorithms used for
these purposes must therefore be scrutinized in detail and
all of the possible problems should be addressed in advance
before real-world deployment. In the course of this literature
review, a number of recurrent issues were discovered related to
the data, models, and complex urban environments which are
detailed in this paper. Large quantities of data are necessary
for training DNNs and evaluating their performance, but this
poses issues such as over-representation of common events or

2

classes, time and effort required to label and select data, and a
lack of consistent benchmarks for a fair evaluation. Complex
DL models can be trained to infer more accurately but this
comes at the cost of efficiency, lack of explainability, and
difficulty in adapting the solution to diverse or unseen use
cases (not present in the training set). Real-world uncertainties
involved in complex urban environments like shadow, lighting,
and occlusion are common issues, while variable surveillance
camera angles and heterogeneous traffic conditions present
further challenges to DNNs even after training on these
conditions.
While these issues have been mentioned in some of the
literature, only a few approaches have been developed to
address them, and even fewer real-world implementation examples were found. Computer vision in transportation is a
very active research field, and over 200 papers were selected
and reviewed for this article. Figure 1 gives an overview of
the applications and challenges for quick reference, while
Table I summarizes the methods used in each application
and associated challenges. The following sections (II, III, IV)
discuss the specific challenges for data, models, and complex
traffic environments. A number of representative applications
and solutions to meet the challenges are explained in section V.
This is followed by section VI, a collection of future directions
that research in this area should take. Finally, section VII
presents some concluding remarks.
The contributions of this paper are:
• Classification of common challenges faced by computer
vision DL methods in complex traffic environments.
• A review of DL models used for some representative
computer vision applications susceptible to the challenges.
• Specific techniques already being used to mitigate the
challenges.
• Future directions of research to improve DL models for
real world complex traffic environments.
II. DATA CHALLENGES
A. Data communication
Data communication, while not considered in most ITS and
AV computer vision studies in the lab, is critical in practical
applications. Individual-camera-based deep learning tasks in
practice commonly require data communication between the
camera and the cloud server at TMC. Video data is in rich
volume, which can cause potential data communication issues,
such as transmission delay and package loss. In a cooperative
camera-sensing environment, there are not only data communications with the server but also among different sensors.
Therefore, two additional issues are multi-sensor calibration
and data synchronization.
Calibration in a cooperative environment aims to determine
the perspective transformation between sensors to be able to
merge acquired data from several views at a given frame [4].
This task is quite challenging in a multi-user environment,
because the transformation matrix between sensors constantly
changes as the vehicles move. In a cooperative context,
calibration relies on the synchronization of the elements in

Fig. 2. Illustration of representative challenges associated with data in
computer vision applications for transportation.

a background image to determine the transformation between
static or mobile sensors [5]. There are multiple sources of
desynchronization, such as an offset between the clocks or
variable communication delays. Although clocks may be synchronized, it is difficult to ensure the data acquisitions are
triggered at the same moment which adds uncertainty towards
merging the acquired data. Similarly, different sampling rates
require interpolation between acquired or predicted data, also
adding uncertainty.
B. Quality of training data and benchmarks
Traffic cameras are widely deployed on roadways and vehicles [6]. TMCs at DOTs and cities constantly collect networkwide traffic camera data, which are valuable for various ITS
applications, such as event recognition and vehicle detection.
However, labeled training data is much less common than
unlabeled data [7], [8]. The lack of annotated datasets for many
applications is slowly being overcome with synthetic data, as
graphical fidelity and simulated physics have become more
and more realistic. For example, ground truth 3D information
in [9] needs high accuracy during training for monocular
3D detection and tracking, so video game data was used.
In addition to realistic appearance, simulated scenarios do
not need to be manually labeled as the labels are already
generated by the simulation, and can support a wide variety
of illuminations, viewpoints, and vehicle behaviors [10]. The
2020 AI City challenge for vehicle re-identification winner utilized a hybrid dataset to significantly improve the performance
[11] by generating examples from real-world data and adding
other simulated views and environments. However, if using
synthetic data, additional learning procedures, e.g., domain
adaptation, are still needed for real-world applications. Lowfidelity simulated data were used to train a real-world object
detector with domain randomization transfer learning [12].
The lack of good quality crash and near-crash data is often
cited as a practical limitation [13]. More crash data will
update the attention guidance in AD, allowing it to capture
long-term crash characteristics, thereby improving crash risk
estimation [14]. There is also a lack of representation in the
literature regarding bicycles as the ego vehicle as mentioned
in [15]. A near-miss incident database was developed in [16]

3

to compensate for the unavailability, however, it is private
because of copyright issues. A review of vehicle behavior
prediction methods [17] discusses the lack of a benchmark
for evaluating existing studies, preventing a fair comparison
of different DL techniques, or classical methods like Bayesian
or Markov decision process. It also highlights that faulty
or limited sensors, constrained computational resources, and
generalizability to any driving scenario are current barriers
to practical deployment and represent a significant research
gap. Some of these issues can be addressed by sensor fusion,
internet of vehicles (IoV), and edge computing [18].
C. Data bias
Although current vehicle detection algorithms perform well
on balanced datasets, they suffer from performance degradation on tail classes when facing imbalanced datasets. In
real-world scenarios, data tends to obey the Zipfian distribution [19] where a large number of tail categories have few
samples. In long-tail datasets, a few head classes (frequent
classes) contribute most of the training samples, while tail
classes (rare classes) are underrepresented. Most DL models
trained with such data minimize empirical risk on long-tail
training data and are biased towards head categories since they
contribute most of the training data [20], [21]. Some methods
like data re-sampling [22] and loss re-weighting [23], can
compensate the underrepresented classes. However, they need
to partition the categories into several groups based on their
category frequency prior. Such hard division between head
and tail classes brings two problems: training inconsistency
between adjacent categories and lack of discriminative power
for rare categories [24].
An object detection study focusing on construction vehicles
found that training a deep model with huge general training
dataset did not perform as well as a smaller model trained
specifically on construction vehicles [25]. Another model
based on YOLOv2 for vehicle size estimation performed
well on commonly seen sizes but varied considerably with
uncommon sizes [26]. The dataset used by [27] for autonomous vehicle object detection had severe class imbalance
with only 1% cyclists represented. A number of weight based
learning strategies were employed to address this, giving
higher weight to underrepresented classes, showing significant
improvements.
General object detectors can be improved using transfer
learning with the underrepresented data for task specific performance benefits [28]. Also, it is noted in [29] that model
bias may not always be apparent from just the training set,
and explanability methods are needed to address the problem.
D. High data volume
Visual data is composed of over 90% of the Internet traffic
and video transmission, computation, and storage pose increasing challenges in ITS and AV fields [6]. The high volume
of traffic and vehicular-based video data from the roadside
and onboard sensors via the traffic camera network or the
Internet of Vehicles (IoV) network poses computational and
bandwidth bottlenecks that cannot be solved by using more

powerful equipment [30]. As many applications in connected
or autonomous vehicles rely on DL, vehicle-cloud architecture
is emerging as an effective distributed computing technique
[31]. With the integration of Road Side Units (RSU), these
edge nodes can process faster and provide low communication
latency.
E. Security and Privacy
Privacy concerns are an important human factor that cannot
be overlooked in the design and operation of ITS applications [32]. Observing and tracking the massive amounts of
the pedestrian and vehicle information causes security and
privacy concerns in ITS environments. For example, UAVs
are capable of collecting traffic data (through onboard video
cameras). However, privacy concerns restrict them from being
a regular part of the ITS sensor network [33]. Video surveillance systems constantly collect human faces and license
plates. Personal privacy is exchanged for security or safety
services provided by the surveillance [34]. Systems deployed
in practice might need to de-identify faces and license plates
in real-time if raw video data is being sent or stored [35].
Any processing would ideally be done on the local edge unit,
limiting the propagation of private information. Full anonymity
is difficult to guarantee, for example, an uncommon model car
with distinctive paint pattern can be traced to its owner by
correlating with other information, even with a blurred license
plate.

Fig. 3. Illustration of representative model challenges. Some demo images
are adopted from [36], [37].

III. M ODEL CHALLENGES
A. Complexity
DL computer vision models have a high complexity with
respect to neural network structures and training procedures.
Many DL models are designed to run on high-performance
cloud centers or AI workstations, and a good model requires
weeks or months of training as well as high power consumption driven by modern Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) or
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs).

4

In ITS and AV field applications, a lot of them have a
requirement for real-time or near real-time operations [6] for
the sake of functionality and traffic safety. The DL model
complexity adds a high cost to the training and inference in
real-time applications; particularly, the trend of ITS and AV
is towards large-scale on-device processing closer to where
the traffic data is generated, e.g., crowdsensing. Three popular
embedded devices are compared in [25], with the Nvidia
Jetson Nano yielding the highest inference efficiency but it
is too little computation power for complex applications.
Real-time applications usually make some modifications
like resizing video to lower resolution or model quantization
and pruning which can lead to loss of performance. The model
complexity of the state-of-the-art DL methods needs to be
reduced in many practical applications in order to meet the
efficiency and accuracy requirements. For example, multi-scale
deformable attention has been used with vision transformer
neural networks in object detection for high performance and
fast convergence leading to faster training and inference [38].
B. Lack of explainability
DNNs are largely seen as black boxes with many layers
of processing, the working of which can be examined using
statistics, but the learned internal representations of the network are based on millions or billions of parameters, making
analysis extremely difficult [29]. This means that the behavior
is essentially unpredictable, and very little explanation can be
given of the decisions. It also makes system validation and
verification impossible for critical use cases like autonomous
driving [39].
The common assumption that a complex black box is necessary for good performance is being challenged [40]. Recent
research is attempting to make DNNs more explainable. A
visualization tool for vision transformers is presented in [41],
which can be used to see the inner mechanisms, such as
hidden parameters, and gain insight into specific parts of
the input that influenced the predictions. A framework for
safety, explainability, and regulations for autonomous driving
was evaluated in post-accident scenarios [42]. The results
showed many benefits including transparency and debugging.
A convolutional neural network (CNN) based architecture is
proposed to detect action-inducing objects for autonomous
vehicles, while also providing explanations for the actions
[43].
C. Transferability and generalizability
Generalization to out-of-distribution data is natural to humans yet challenging for machines because most learning
algorithms strongly rely on the independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) assumption training at testing data, which is
often violated in practice due to domain shift. Domain generalization aims to generalize models to new domains without
knowledge about the target distribution during training. Different methods have been proposed for learning generalizable
and transferable representations [44].
Most existing approaches belong to the category of domain
alignment, where the main idea is to minimize the difference

among source domains for learning domain-invariant representations. Features that are invariant to the source domain shift
should also be robust to any unseen target domain shift. Data
augmentation has been a common practice to regularize the
training of machine learning models to avoid overfitting and
improve generalization [45], which is particularly important
for over-parameterized DNNs.
Visual attention in CNNs can be used to highlight the
regions of the image involved in a decision, with causal
filtering to find the most relevant parts [46]. The importance
of individual pixels is estimated in [47] by using randomly
masked versions of images and comparing the output predictions. This approach does not apply to spatio-temporal
methods or those that consider relationships between objects
in complex environments.
D. Real-world testing
In general, DL methods have been shown to be prone to
underspecification, a problem that appears regardless of model
type or application. Among other domains, underspecification
in computer vision is analyzed in [48], specifically for DL
models such as the commonly used ResNet-50 and a scaledup transfer learning image classification model, Big Transfer
(BiT) [49]. It is shown that while benchmark scores improved
with more model complexity and training data, testing with
real-world distortions results in poor and highly varied performance that depends strongly on the random seeds used to
initialize training.
Practical systems need to be efficient in terms of memory
and computation for real-time processing on a variety of
low-cost hardware [50]. Some approaches towards efficient
and low-cost computation include parameter pruning, network
quantization, low-rank factorization, and model distillation.
Approaches like [51] are efficient and capable of real-time
trajectory prediction but are not end-to-end because they
assume the prior existence of an object tracking system to
estimate the states of surrounding vehicles.
Vulnerable road users (VRU) such as pedestrians and bicyclists present a unique problem, since they can change their
direction and speeds very rapidly, and interact with the traffic
environment differently than vehicles [52].
Some of the major barriers to the practical deployment of
computer vision models in ITS are the heterogeneity of data
sources and software, sensor hardware failure, and extreme or
unusual sensing cases [53]. Furthermore, recent frameworks
such as those based on edge computing directly expose the
wireless communication signals of a multitude of heterogeneous devices with various security implementations, creating an ever-increasing potential attack surface for malicious
actors [54]. Deep learning models have been developed to
detect these attacks, however real-time application and online
learning are still areas of active research [55].
IoV faces fundamental practical issues arising from the fact
that moving vehicles will present highly variable processing
requirements on the edge nodes, while each vehicle can also
have many concurrent edge and cloud related applications
running, along with harsh wireless communication environments [56]. Other challenges related to edge computing for

5

objects such as moving vehicles or other road users may
occlude one another, such as in crowds. Occlusion is also a
common issue in object tracking [65] because once the tracked
vehicle disappears from view and reappears, it is considered
a different vehicle causing tracking and trajectory information
to be inaccurate.
C. Camera angle

Fig. 4. Illustration of representative scenarios in complex traffic environments.
Some demo images are adopted from [58].

autonomous vehicles include cooperative sensing, cooperative
decisions, and cybersecurity [57]. Attackers can use lasers and
bright infrared light to interfere with cameras and LiDAR,
change traffic signage, and replay attacks over the communication channel. A visual depiction of model challenges can be
seen in Figure 3.
IV. C OMPLEX T RAFFIC E NVIRONMENTS
A. Shadow, lighting, weather
Situations like shadows, adverse weather, similarity between
background and foreground, strong or insufficient illumination
in the real world are cited as common issues [59], [60]. The
appearance of camera images is known to be affected by
adverse weather conditions, such as heavy fog, sleeting rain,
snowstorms, and dust storms [61].
A real-time crash detection method in [62] utilizes foreground extraction using Gaussian Mixture Model, then tracks
vehicles using a mean shift algorithm. The position, speed,
and acceleration o the vehicles are passed through threshold
functions to determine the detection of a crash. While computationally efficient, such methods suffer significantly in the
presence of noise, complex traffic environment, and change in
weather.
In harsh weather conditions, vehicles captured by traffic
surveillance cameras exhibit issues such as underexposure,
blurring, and partial occlusion. At the same time, raindrops,
and snowflakes that appear in traffic scenes add difficulty
for the algorithm to extract vehicle targets [58]. At night,
or in tunnels with vehicles driving towards the camera, the
scene may be masked completely because of the high beam
glare [63].
B. Occlusion
Occlusion is one of the most challenging issues, where a
target object is only partially available to the camera or sensor
due to obstruction by another foreground object. Occlusion
exists in various forms ranging from partial occlusion to
heavy occlusion [64]. In AD, target objects can be occluded
by static objects such as buildings and lampposts. Dynamic

In the applications of transportation infrastructure, the diversity of surveillance cameras and their viewing angles pose
challenges to DL methods trained on limited types of camera
views [66][67]. While the algorithm in [68] is computationally
efficient and can work in varying lighting conditions and traffic
density scenarios, lower-pitch camera views and road marking
corners can introduce significant errors. The model in [69] can
identify anomalies near the camera, including their start and
end times, but is not accurate for anomalies in the distance
since the vehicles occupy only a few pixels.
An earlier survey on anomaly detection from surveillance
video concluded that illumination, camera angle, heterogeneous objects, and a lack of real-world datasets are the major
challenges [67]. The methods used for sparse and dense traffic
conditions are different and lack generalizability. Matching
objects in different views is another major problem in a multiview vision scene, as multi-view ITS applications need to
process data across the different images captured by different
cameras at the same time [70].
D. Camera blur and degraded images
Surveillance cameras are subject to weather elements. Water, dust, and particulate matter can accumulate on the lens
causing image quality degradation. Strong wind can cause
a camera to shake, resulting in motion blur in the whole
image. Front-facing cameras on autonomous vehicles also face
this, as insects can smash onto the glass, causing blind spots
in the camera’s field of view. Specifically, object detection
and segmentation algorithms suffer greatly [71], and unless
preparations are made in the model, false detections can cause
serious safety issues in AD and miss important events in
surveillance applications. Some approaches to address this
include using degraded images for training, image restoration
preprocessing, and fine-tuning pre-trained networks to learn
from degraded images. For example, Dense-Gram networks
are used in [72] which improve image segmentation performance in degraded images.
E. Heterogeneous, urban traffic conditions
Dense urban traffic scenarios are full of complex visual
elements, not only in quantity but also in the variety of
different vehicles and their interactions, as shown in Figure
4. The presence of cars, buses, bicycles, and pedestrians in
the same intersection is a significant problem for autonomous
navigation and trajectory computation [73]. The different sizes,
turning radii, speeds, and driver behaviors are further compounded by the interactions between these road users. From
a DL perspective, it is easy to find videos of heterogeneous

6

urban traffic, but labeling for ground truth is very timeconsuming. Simulation software usually cannot capture the
complex dynamics of such scenarios, especially the traffic
rule-breaking behaviors seen in dense urban centers. In fact,
a specific dataset was created to represent these behaviors in
[74]. A simulator for unregulated dense traffic was created in
[75] which is useful for autonomous driving perception and
control but does not represent the trajectory and interactions
of real-world road users.
V. A PPLICATIONS
A. Traffic flow estimation
1) Models and algorithms: Traffic flow variables include
traffic volume, density, speed, and queue length. The algorithms and models to detect and track objects to estimate
traffic flow variables from videos may be classified into
one-stage and two-stage methods. In one-stage methods, the
variables are estimated from detection results and there is no
further classification and location optimization, for example:
1) YOLOv3 + DeepSORT tracker [76]; 2) YOLOv2 + spatial
pyramid pooling [77]; 3) AlexNet + optical flow + Gaussian
mixture model [78]; 4) CNN + optical flow based on UAV
video [79]; 5) SSD (single shot detection) based on UAV
video [80].
Two-stage methods first generate region proposals that contain all potential targets in the input images and then conduct
classification and location optimization. Examples of twostage methods are: 1) Faster R-CNN + SORT tracker [81];
2) Faster R-CNN [82], [83]; 3) Faster R-CNN based on UAV
video [84], [85].
2) Current methods to overcome challenge: A DL method
at the edge of the ITS that performs real-time vehicle detection,
tracking, and counting in traffic surveillance video has been
proposed in [86]. The neural network detects individual vehicles at the single-frame level by capturing appearance features
with the YOLOv3 object-detection method, deployed on edge
devices to minimize bandwidth and power consumption. A
vehicle detection and tracking approach in adverse weather
conditions that achieves the best trade-off between accuracy
and detection speed in various traffic environments is discussed
in [61]. Also, a novel dataset called DAWN is introduced for
vehicle detection and tracking in adverse weather conditions
like heavy fog, rain, snow, and sandstorms, in order to make
training less biased.
B. Traffic congestion detection
1) Models and algorithms: The methods that detect traffic
congestion based on computer vision may also be divided
into one-stage methods and multi-step methods. The onestage methods identify vehicles from the video images and
directly perform traffic congestion detection. Among the onestage methods are: (1) AlexNet and YOLO [87] to distinguish congestion and non-congestion, (2) AlexNet and
VGGNet [88] which classify ‘jam’ and ‘no jam’; and (3)
YOLO and Mask R-CNN [89] recognize light, medium, and
heavy congestion (identifying the number of vehicles in each
frame and then classify). The multi-step methods first apply

traffic flow estimation models to measure traffic variables
and then use the traffic flow variables to infer congestion.
Examples of two-stage traffic congestion detection models are:
(1) YOLOv3 [90] and YOLOv4 [63] for vehicle detection and
counting, (2) counting vehicles using Faster R-CNN [91] and
applying regression for traffic congestion. Beside these, the
traffic congestion can be evaluated by the traffic flow detection
algorithms [92] using vehicle detection and tracking.
2) Current methods to overcome challenge: Congestion
detection performance can be improved using multiple sensors
based solutions including radar, lasers, and sensor fusion
since it is hard to achieve ideal performance and accuracy
using a single sensor in real-world scenarios. There is a wide
use of decision-making algorithms for processing fusion data
acquired from multiple sensors [93]. A CNN-based model
trained with bad weather condition datasets can improve
the detection performance [94], while generative adversarial
network (GAN) based Style Transfer methods have also been
applied [95][96]. These approaches help to minimize the
model challenges related to generalizability, which in turn
improves real-world performance.
C. Autonomous driving perception: detection
1) Models and algorithms: Common detection tasks that
assist in AD are categorized into traffic sign detection, traffic
signal detection, road/lane detection, pedestrian detection, and
vehicle detection.
There are two tasks in a typical traffic sign recognition
system: finding the locations and sizes of traffic signs in
natural scene images (traffic sign detection) and classifying
the traffic signs into their specific sub-classes (traffic sign
classification) [97]. An improved Sparse R-CNN was used for
traffic sign detection in [98], while an efficient algorithm based
on YOLOv3 model for traffic sign detection was implemented
in [99]. SegU-Net, formed by merging the state-of-the-art
segmentation architectures SegNet and U-Net to detect traffic
signs from video sequences has been proposed [100]. Several
adaptations to Mask R-CNN were tested in [101] for detection
and recognition with end-to-end learning on the domain of
traffic signs. They also proposed a data augmentation technique based on the distribution of geometric and appearance
distortions.
A method that uses an encoder-decoder DNN with focal
regression loss to detect small traffic signals is proposed in
[102]. It is shown in [103] that Faster R-CNN with InceptionResnet-v2 model is more suitable for traffic light detection
than others. A practical traffic light detection system in [104]
combines CNN classifier model and heuristic region of interest
(ROI) candidate detection on self-driving hardware platform
Nvidia Jetpack Tx1/2 that can handle high-resolution images.
The recognition accuracy and processing speed are improved
by combining detection and tracking in [105] to enhance the
practicality of the traffic signal recognition system in autonomous vehicles using CNN and integrated channel feature
tracking to determine the coordinates and color for traffic
lights.
Lane detection aims to identify the left and right lane boundaries from a processed image and apply an algorithm to track

7

the road ahead. A novel hybrid neural network combining
CNN and recurrent neural network (RNN) for robust lane
detection in driving scenes has been proposed [106]. Features
on each frame of the input video were first abstracted by
a CNN encoder and the sequential encoded features were
processed by a ConvLSTM. The outputs were fed into the
CNN decoder for information reconstruction and lane prediction. Another lane detection method is an anchor-based singlestage lane detection model called LaneATT [107]. It uses a
feature pooling method with a relatively lightweight backbone
CNN, while maintaining high accuracy. A novel anchor-based
attention mechanism to aggregate global information was
also proposed. A new method to impose structure on badly
posed semantic segmentation problems is proposed in [108]
by using a generative adversarial network architecture with a
discriminator that is trained on both predictions and labels at
the same time.
A two-stage detector SDS-RCNN [109] jointly learned
pedestrian detection and bounding-box aware semantic segmentation, thus encouraging model learning on pedestrian regions. RPN+BF [110] used a boosted forest to replace secondstage learning and leveraged hard mining for proposals.
However, involving such downstream classifiers could bring
more training complexity. AR-Ped [111] exploited sequential
labeling policy in the region proposal network to gradually
filter out better proposals. The work of [112] employed a
two-stage pretrained person detector (Faster R-CNN) and an
instance segmentation model for person re-identification. Each
detected person is cropped out from the original image and fed
to another network. Wang et al. [113] introduced repulsion
losses that prevent a predicted bounding box from shifting to
neighboring overlapped objects to counter occlusions. Twostage detectors need to generate proposals in the first stage,
and thus are slow for inference in practice. One-stage detector
GDFL [114] included semantic segmentation, which guided
feature layers to emphasize pedestrian regions. Liu et al. [115]
extended the single-stage architecture with an asymptotic
localization fitting module storing multiple predictors to evolve
default anchor boxes. This improves the quality of positive
samples while enabling hard negative mining with increased
thresholds. Similar to pedestrian detection, vehicle detection
in ITS also is a popular and challenging computer vision
task [116]. Current generic vehicle detectors are divided into
two categories: CNN-based two-stage detectors and CNNbased one-stage detectors. the representative two-stage detectors include Faster R-CNN [110], spatial pyramid pooling (SPP)-net [117], feature pyramid networks (FPN) [118],
and Mask R-CNN [119]. And the representative one-stage
detectors include YOLO [120], Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD) [121], and deeply supervised object detectors
(DSOD) [122]. The two-step framework is a region proposalbased method, giving a coarse scan of the whole image first
and then focusing on regions of interest (RoIs). While onestep frameworks are based on global regression/ classification,
mapping straightly from image pixels to bounding box coordinates and class probabilities. Based on these two frameworks,
most of the works get promising results in vehicle detection
by combining other methods, such as multitask learning [123],

multi-scale representation [124], and context modeling [125].
2) Current methods to overcome challenge: In traffic sign
detection, existing traffic sign datasets are limited in terms
of the type and severity of challenging conditions. Metadata
corresponding to these conditions is unavailable and it is not
possible to investigate the effect of a single factor because
of the simultaneous changes in numerous conditions. To
overcome this, [126] introduced the CURE-TSDReal dataset,
based on simulated conditions that correspond to real-world
environments. An end-to-end traffic sign detection framework
Feature Aggregation Multipath Network (FAMN) is proposed
in [127]. It consists of two main structures named Feature
Aggregation and Multipath Network structure to solve the
problems of small object detection and fine-grained classification in traffic sign detection.
A vehicle highlight information-assisted neural network
for vehicle detection at night is presented in [128], which
included two innovations: establishing the label hierarchy for
vehicles based on their highlights and designing a multi-layer
fused vehicle highlight information network. Real-time vehicle
detection for nighttime situations is presented in [129], where
images include flashes that occupy large image regions, and
the actual shape of vehicles is not well defined. By using a
global image descriptor along with a grid of foveal classifiers,
vehicle positions are accurately and efficiently estimated. AugGAN [95] is an unpaired image-to-image translation network
for domain adaptation in vehicle detection. It quantitatively
surpassed competing methods for achieving higher nighttime
vehicle detection accuracy because of better image-object
preservation. A stepwise domain adaptation (SDA) detection
method is proposed to further improve the performance of
CycleGAN by minimizing the divergence in cross-domain
object detection tasks in [130]. In the first step, an unpaired
image-to-image translator is trained to construct a fake target
domain by translating the source images to similar ones in
the target domain. In the second step, to further minimize
divergence across domains, an adaptive CenterNet is designed
to align distributions at the feature level in an adversarial
learning manner.
D. Autonomous driving perception: segmentation
1) Models and algorithms: Image segmentation contains
three sub-tasks: semantic segmentation, instance segmentation,
and panoptic segmentation. Semantic segmentation is a fine
prediction task to label each pixel of an image with a corresponding object class, instance segmentation is designed to
identify and segment pixels that belong to each object instance,
while panoptic segmentation unifies semantic segmentation
and instance segmentation such that all pixels are given both
a class label and an instance ID [131].
YOLACT [132] splits instance segmentation into two parallel sub-architectures. Protonet architecture extracts spatial
information by generating a certain number of prototype
masks, and Head architecture generates the mask coefficients
and object locations. In addition, it employs Fast NMS rather
than traditional NMS to reduce post-processing time. CenterMask [133] is an efficient anchor-free instance segmenta-

8

tion, that adds a novel spatial attention-guided mask (SAGMask) branch to a one-stage object detector in the same vein
as Mask R-CNN. Path Aggregation Network (PANet) [134]
is proposed to integrate comprehensively low-level location
information and high-level semantic information. Based on
Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN) [118], PANet designs a
bottom-up context information aggregation structure, which
can integrate different levels of features. A learning-based
snake algorithm [135] is proposed for real-time instance
segmentation, which introduces the circular convolution for
efficient feature learning on the contour and regresses vertexwise offsets for the contour deformation. A top-down instance
segmentation framework based on explicit shape encoding,
named ESE-Seg, is proposed to reduce the computational
time of instance segmentation by decoding the multiple object
shapes with tensor operations, thus performing the instance
segmentation at almost the same speed as the object detection
[136]. Multi-task Network Cascades (MNC) [137] divide
the instance segmentation task into three cascaded sub-tasks:
instance discrimination (discriminating different instances with
non-semantic bounding boxes), mask generation (generating
pixel-level masks), and object classification (assigning a semantic label to each instance). Hybrid Task Cascade (HTC)
is proposed for instance segmentation in [138]. It interweaves
box and mask branches for joint multi-stage processing, adopts
a semantic segmentation branch to provide spatial context, and
integrates complementary features together in each stage.
2) Current methods to overcome challenge: Recent directions in segmentation include weakly-supervised semantic
segmentation [139], [140], domain adaptation [141], [142],
multi-modal data fusion [143], [144], and real-time semantic
segmentation [145], [146], [147].
TS-Yolo [148] is a CNN-based model for accurate traffic
detection under severe weather conditions using new samples
from data augmentation. The data augmentation was conducted using copy-paste strategy, and a large number of new
samples were constructed from existing traffic-sign instances.
Based on YoloV5, MixConv was also used to mix different
kernel sizes in a single convolution operation so that patterns
with various resolutions can be captured. Detecting and classifying real-life small traffic signs from large input images
is difficult due to them occupying fewer pixels relative to
larger targets. To address this, Dense-RefineDet [149] applies a
single-shot, object-detection framework to maintain a suitable
accuracy–speed trade-off. An end-to-end traffic sign detection
framework Feature Aggregation Multipath Network is proposed in [127] to solve the problems of small object detection
and fine-grained classification in traffic sign detection.
E. Cooperative perception
1) Models and algorithms: In connected autonomous vehicles (CAV), cooperative perception can be performed at three
levels depending on the type of data: early fusion (raw data),
intermediate fusion (preprocessed data), where intermediate
neural features are extracted and transmitted, and late fusion
(processed data), where detection outputs (3D bounding box
position, confidence score) are shared. Cooperative perception studies how to leverage visual cues from neighboring

connected vehicles and infrastructure to boost the overall
perception performance [150].
1) Early fusion: [151] fuses the sensor data collected from
different positions and angles of connected vehicles using
raw-data level LiDAR 3D point clouds, and a point cloudbased 3D object detection method is proposed to work on a
diversity of aligned point clouds. DiscoNet [152] leverages
knowledge distillation to enhance training by constraining the
corresponding features to the ones from the network for early
fusion.
2) Intermediate fusion: F-Cooper [153] provides both a new
framework for applications On-Edge, servicing autonomous
vehicles as well as new strategies for 3D fusion detection.
Wang, et al. [154] proposed a vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) approach for perception and prediction that transmits compressed
intermediate representations of the P&P neural network. Xu,
et al. [155] proposed an Attentive Intermediate Fusion pipeline
to better capture interactions between connected agents within
the network. A robust cooperative perception framework with
vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communication using a novel
vision Transformer is presented in [150].
3) Late fusion: Car2X-based perception [156] is modeled as
a virtual sensor in order to integrate it into a high-level sensor
data fusion architecture.
2) Current methods to overcome challenge: To reduce
the communications load and overhead, an improved algorithm for message generation rules in collective perception
is proposed [157], which improves the reliability of V2X
communications by reorganizing the transmission and content
of collective perception messages. This paper [158] presents
and evaluates a unified cooperative perception framework
containing a decentralized data association and fusion process
that is scalable with respect to participation variances. The
evaluation considers the effects of communication losses in
the ad-hoc V2V network and the random vehicle motions in
traffic by adopting existing models along with a simplified
algorithm for individual vehicle’s on-board sensor field of
view. AICP is proposed in [159], the first solution that focuses on optimizing informativeness for pervasive cooperative
perception systems with efficient filtering at both the network
and application layers. To facilitate system networking, they
also use a networking protocol stack that includes a dedicated
data structure and a lightweight routing protocol specifically
for informativeness-focused applications.
F. Vehicle interaction
1) Models and algorithms: Computer vision methods can
be used to detect and classify crash and near-crash events
based on motion and trajectories. CNN, in the form of modified YOLOv3, is used to detect objects and extract semantic
information about the road scene from onboard camera data
from the SHRP2 dataset in [13]. Optical flow is calculated
from consecutive frames to track objects and to generate
features (hard deceleration, the maximum area of the largest
vehicle, time to collision, etc.) that are combined with telematics data (speed and 3-axis acceleration) to train a random
forest classifier on safe, near-crash, and crash events.

9

Dashcam videos were used to train a Dynamic Spatial
Assistance (DSA) network to distribute attention to objects and
model temporal dependencies in [160]. The method was able
to predict crashes around 2 seconds in advance. Understanding
multi-vehicle interaction in urban environments is challenging,
and model-based methods may require prior knowledge, so a
more general approach is explored in [161], where YOLOv3
is used for object tracking from traffic camera video from
the NGSIM dataset and a Gaussian velocity field is used to
describe the interaction behaviors between multiple vehicles.
From this, an 11-layer deep autoencoder learns the latent
low dimensional representations for each frame, followed by
a hidden semi-Markov model with a hierarchical Dirichlet
process, which optimizes the number of interaction patterns,
to cluster representations into traffic primitives corresponding
to the interaction patterns. The pipeline can be used to analyze
complex multi-agent interactions from traffic video. DL methods are able to extract semantic descriptions from video, like
in [14], which can give advance warning of risky situations. A
scenario-wise spatio-temporal attention guidance system was
created by data mining from descriptive semantic variables
in fatal crash data to support the design of a model based on
YOLOv3 for evaluating crash risk from dashcam footage. The
attention guidance extracted semantic descriptions like “pedestrian”, “school bus” and “atmospheric condition”, followed by
DL to optimize attention on these variables to identify clusters
and associate scene features with crash features.
2) Current methods to overcome challenges: While most
vehicle interaction methods reviewed thus far make little mention of the practical challenges in variable weather and lighting, [162] highlights a background learning method specifically to adapt to changing lighting conditions and headlight illumination in surveillance footage and even utilizes a threshold
based noise removal for rainy conditions to detect near-miss
events at grade crossings. Domain adaptation, an example of
transfer learning, was employed in [96] to make use of labeled
daytime footage for vehicle detection in unlabeled nighttime
images by a generative adversarial network called CycleGAN
[163], which can be used with many real-world deep learning
computer vision applications. YouTube dashcam footage was
used for crash detection in an ensemble multimodal DL
method, based on the gated recurrent unit (GRU) and CNN,
that uses both video and audio data [164]. The real-world data
consists of positive clips containing crashes and negative clips
containing normal driving. A crowd-sourced dashcam video
dataset was also contributed by [160] for accident anticipation
containing scenarios like crowded streets, complicated road
environments, and diversity of accidents. To address lowvisibility conditions like rain, fog, and nighttime footage, [165]
used Retinex image enhancement algorithm for preprocessing
and YOLOv3 for object detection, followed by a decision tree
to classify crashes. It balances dynamic range and enhances
edges, but congested mixed-flow traffic, lower-quality video,
and fast vehicles are still major sources of error. The use of
deep convolutional autoencoders for representation learning
complemented with vehicle tracking is used to detect accidents
from surveillance footage in [166]. The testing was performed
on data collected during bright sunlight, night, early morning,

and also from a variety of cameras and angles. However, there
are significant false alarms caused by low visibility, occlusions,
and large variations in traffic patterns. The lack of near-miss
data can be met with combining vehicle event recorder data
and object detection from an onboard camera as proposed
in [167]. By extracting two deep feature representations that
consider the car status and the surrounding objects, the deep
learning method can label near-miss events. While the method
does not claim to be real-time, it can generate large volumes
of labeled training data for near-crash events.
A method to detect cycling near-misses from front view
video is developed in [15] using optical flow, CNN, LSTM,
and a fully connected prediction stage. The method was trained
with complex urban environments and also contributes to a
large dataset containing labeled near-miss events. A ResNetbased model was used to detect pedestrians and evaluate
risk from a near-miss dataset in [168]. The dataset contains
videos from different vehicles, places (intersections, city,
major roads), day and night time, and weather conditions.
However, the model suffers from overfitting as a result of
having only near-miss data for training.
G. Road user behavior prediction
1) Models and algorithms: Trajectory prediction from
videos is useful for autonomous driving, traffic forecasting,
and congestion management. Older works in this domain
focused on homogeneous agents such as cars on a highway
or pedestrians in a crowd, whereas heterogeneous agents were
only considered in sparse scenarios with certain assumptions
like lane-based driving. A long short-term memory (LSTM)
and CNN hybrid network, that learns the relationship between
pairs of heterogeneous agents, was developed in [74] to extract
agent shape, velocity, and traffic concentration, which are
passed through LSTMs to generate horizon and neighborhood
maps, which then go through convolution networks to produce
latent representations that are passed through a final LSTM
to predict the trajectory. It can perform accurately in dense,
heterogeneous, urban traffic conditions in real time. The paper
also contributes a new labeled dataset captured from crowded
Asian cities. In order to be useful, trajectory prediction needs
to take into account the motion of surrounding objects and
inter-object interactions in real time. Therefore, a different
approach to motion prediction is discussed in [169] based on
the graph convolutional model, which takes trajectory data as
input and represents the interactions of nearby objects and
extracts features. The graph model output is then passed into
an encoder-decoder LSTM model for robust predictions that
can consider the interaction between vehicles. The method
enables 30% higher prediction accuracy in addition to 5x faster
execution. The algorithm uses trajectory data that has already
been extracted from surveillance video data like NGSIM [170].
In [171], vehicle trajectory of vehicles is calculated using
Lucas-Kanade algorithm on dashcam video. Synthetic data
was also used for augmenting the dataset to train an LSTM
network to predict future motion and an SVM is used to
classify the action, for eg. changing lanes. The method predicts
the next 6 seconds of motion on highways with 92% accuracy.

10

2) Current methods to overcome challenges: The dynamics
of vulnerable road users are described by a Switching Linear
Dynamical System (SLDS) in [172] and extended with a
dynamic bayesian network using context from features extracted from vehicle-mounted stereo cameras focusing on both
static and dynamic cues. The approach can work in real-time,
providing accurate predictions of road user trajectories. It can
be improved by the inclusion of more context like traffic lights
and pedestrian crossings. The use of onboard camera and
LiDAR along with V2V communication is explored in [173]
to predict trajectories using the random forest and LSTM architecture. YOLO is used to detect cars and provide bounding
boxes, while LiDAR provides subtle changes in position, and
V2V communication transmits raw values like steering angles
to reduce the uncertainty and latency of predictions.
The TRAF dataset was used in [174] for robust end-to-end
real-time trajectory prediction from still or moving cameras.
Mask R-CNN and reciprocal velocity obstacles algorithm are
used for multi-vehicle tracking. The last 3 seconds of tracking
are used to predict the next 5 seconds of trajectory as in [74],
with the added advantage of being end-to-end trainable and not
requiring annotated trajectory data. The paper also contributes
TrackNPred, a python-based library that contains implementations of different trajectory prediction methods. It is a common
interface for many trajectory prediction approaches and can
be used for performance comparisons using standard error
measurement metrics on real-world dense and heterogeneous
traffic datasets.
Most DL methods for trajectory prediction do not uncover
the underlying reward function, instead, they only rely on
previously seen examples, which hinders generalizability and
limits their scope. In [175], inverse reinforcement learning
is used to find the reward function so that the model can
be said to have a tangible goal, allowing it to be deployed
in any environment. Transformer-based motion prediction is
performed in [176] to achieve state-of-the-art multimodal
trajectory prediction in the Agroverse dataset. The network
models both the road geometry and interactions between the
vehicles. Pedestrian intention in complex urban scenarios is
predicted by graph convolution networks on spatio-temporal
graphs in [177]. The method considers the relationship between pedestrians waiting to cross and the movement of
vehicles. While achieving 80% accuracy on multiple datasets,
it predicts intent to cross one second in advance. On the
other hand, pedestrians modeled as automatons, combined
with SVM without the need for pose information, result in
longer predictions but lack the consideration of contextual
information [178].
H. Traffic anomaly detection
1) Models and Algorithms: Traffic surveillance cameras
can be used to automatically detect traffic anomalies like
stopped vehicles and queues. The detection of low-level image
features like corners of vehicles has been used by [68] to
demonstrate queue detection and queue length estimation
without object tracking or background removal in different
lighting conditions. Tracking methods based on optical flow

can not only provide queue length, but also speed, vehicle
count, waiting time, and time headway. In [179], the authors
use optical flow assuming constant short-term brightness to
detect vehicle features and successfully track them even with
occlusions. The speed of individual vehicles can be estimated,
allowing the detection of stopped vehicles or queue formation.
Trajectory analysis has also been used to identify illegal or
dangerous movements [65]. The background subtraction-based
approaches are, however, limited to favorable scenarios and do
not generalize well. On the other hand, the system has been
physically deployed to analyze surveillance camera video.
An interesting method is applied in [180] involving partitioning the video into spatial and temporal blocks, local
invariant features are then learned from traffic footage to create
a visual codebook of the image descriptors using Localityconstrained Linear Coding. Then, a Gaussian distribution
model is trained to learn the probabilities corresponding to
normal traffic, which can be used to detect anomalies. The
image description makes it more robust to lighting, perspective, and occlusions. Armstrong, et al. [69] proposed a decision
tree-based DL approach for anomaly detection using YOLOv5
for vehicle detection, followed by background estimation, then
a decision tree considers factors like vehicle size, likelihood,
and road feature mask to eliminate false positives. Adaptive
thresholding allows for robustness under variable illumination
and weather conditions. A perspective map approach is discussed by [181], which models the background using road
segmentation based on a traffic flow frequency map, then the
perspective is detected from linear regression of object sizes
based on ResNet50. Finally, a spatial-temporal matrix discriminating module does thresholding on consecutive frames to
detect anomalous states.
2) Current methods to overcome challenges: Anomaly detection relies on surveillance cameras which usually provide
a view far along the road, but vehicles in the distance occupy
only a few pixels which make detection difficult. Thus, [182]
uses pixel-level tracking in addition to box-level tracking
for multi-granularity. The key idea is mask extraction based
on frame difference and vehicle trajectory tracking based
on Gaussian Mixture Model to eliminate moving vehicles
combined with segmentation based on frame changes to also
eliminate parking zones. Anomaly fusion uses the box and
pixel-level tracking features with backtracking optimization to
refine predictions. Surveillance cameras are prone to shaking
in the wind, so video stabilization preprocessing was performed before using two-stage vehicle detection in the form of
Faster R-CNN and Cascade R-CNN [183]. An efficient realtime method for anomaly detection from surveillance video
decouples the appearance and motion learning into two parts
[184]. First, an autoencoder learns appearance features, then
3D convolutional layers can use latent codes from multiple
past frames to predict features for future frames. A significant
difference between predicted and actual features indicates an
anomaly. The model can be deployed on edge nodes near the
traffic cameras, and the latent features appear to be robust
to illumination and weather changes compared to pixel-wise
methods.
To shed reliance on annotated data for anomalies, an unsu-

11

pervised one-class approach in [185] applies spatio-temporal
convolutional autoencoder to get latent features, stacks them
together, and a sequence-to-sequence LSTM learns the temporal patterns. The method performs well on multiple real-world
surveillance footage datasets, but not better than supervised
training methods. The advantage is that it can be indefinitely
trained on normal traffic data without any labeled anomalies.
I. Edge computing
1) Models and algorithms: Computer vision in ITS requires
efficient infrastructure architecture to analyze data in real time.
If all acquired video streams are sent to a single server,
the required bandwidth and computation would not be able
to provide a usable service. For example, edge computing
architecture for real-time automatic failure detection using a
video usefulness metric was explored in [193]. Only video
deemed to be useful is transmitted to the server, while malfunction of the surveillance camera, or obstruction of view,
is automatically reported. Edge-cloud-based computing can
implement DL models, not just for computer vision tasks,
but also for resource allocation and efficiency [194]. Passive
surveillance has now been superseded in literature by the
increasing availability of sensor-equipped vehicles that can
perform perception and mapping cooperatively [56].
Onboard computing resources in vehicles are often not
powerful enough to process all sensor data in real time, and
applications like localization and mapping can be very computationally intensive. The internet of things (IoT) architecture
allows for edge nodes to offload that computation and provide
results at low latency to nearby users [195]. This approach
can avoid multiple cars doing the same computation with
similar inputs. One technique to offload computation tasks
is discussed in [186], combining integer linear programming
for offline scheduling optimization and heuristics for online,
real-world deployment. The authors compress 3D point cloud
LIDAR data collected from the vehicle’s sensor and send
it to the edge node for classification and feature extraction.
A deep reinforcement learning algorithm known as Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient is proposed in [188], which
can dynamically allocate computing and caching resources
throughout the network. Future work in this direction will
handle multiple communication channels, interference management, forecast handover, and bandwidth allocation. In the
macro scale, V2V communication can be used for traffic parameter estimation and management with sparse connectivity,
while higher connected vehicle market penetration will allow
safety applications like collision avoidance [196].
Applications for vehicles can include near-crash detection,
navigation, video streaming, and smart traffic lights. The
onboard unit can also be used as a mobile cache, and communicate with other vehicles via V2V networking. Real-time
near-crash detection using edge computing was developed
in [187]. The system uses dashcam video for SSD vehicle
and pedestrian detection, followed by SORT for tracking to
estimate the time to collision (TTC). It was tested on online
datasets and on real cars and buses. The detected events,
along with CAN bus messages was used to filter irrelevant

data, saving bandwidth for data collection. A practical deployment of parking surveillance using edge-cloud computing was
presented in [197], the edge device performs detection and
transmits the bounding box and object types to the server,
which uses this information for labeling and tracking. A
different approach by [198] focused on vehicle tracking from
top view cameras and number plate recognition from groundlevel cameras for real-time occupancy information and to
automatically charge a vehicle for the time it was parked.
Large-scale traffic monitoring using computer vision and edge
computing was detailed in [189] where edge nodes close
to surveillance cameras can process low-resolution videos
to monitor traffic, detect congestion, and detect speed if
the available bandwidth is low. If high bandwidth to the
server is available, high-quality video will be sent for similar
processing. Edge computing for vehicle detection is examined
in [190]. The algorithm divides the traffic video into segments
of interest and then uses YOLOv3 for vehicle detection in
real-time on the edge node, and the extracted clips are used
as training data for the edge server.
2) Current methods to overcome challenges: One problem
with large-scale DL is that the huge quantity of data produced
cannot be sent to a cloud computer for training. Federated
learning [199] has emerged as a solution to this problem,
especially considering the heterogeneous data sources, bandwidth, and privacy issues [53]. Training can be performed
on edge nodes or edge servers, with the results being sent
to the cloud to aggregate in the shared deep learning model
[56]. Federated learning is also robust to failure of individual
edge nodes [191]. Concerns of bandwidth, data privacy, and
power requirements are addressed in [200] by transferring
only inferred data from edge nodes to the cloud, in the
form of incremental and unsupervised learning. In general, the
processing of data on the edge to reduce bandwidth has the
pleasant side effect of anonymizing the transmitted data [201].
Another effort to reduce bandwidth requirements employs
spectral clustering compression performed on spatio-temporal
features needed for traffic flow prediction [192].
Deep learning models cannot be directly exported to mobile
edge nodes, as they are usually too computationally intensive.
Neural network pruning both in terms of storage and computation was introduced in [202], while implementation of the
resulting sparse network on hardware is discussed in [203],
achieving multiple orders of magnitude increase in efficiency.
A general lightweight CNN model was developed for mobile
edge units in [204], matching or outperforming AlexNet and
VGG-16 while being a fraction of the size and computation
cost. Edge computing-based traffic flow detection using deep
learning was deployed by [86] where YOLOv3 was trained
and pruned, along with DeepSORT, to be deployed on the
edge device for real-time performance. A thorough review
of deploying compact DNNs on low-power edge computers
for IoT applications can be found in [205]. They note that
the diversity and quantity of DNN applications require an
automated method for model compression beyond traditional
pruning techniques.

12

TABLE I
C OMPUTER V ISION A PPLICATIONS IN T RANSPORTATION
Application
Traffic flow parameter estimation

Congestion detection and prediction

Autonomous driving perception: detection

Autonomous driving perception: segmentation

Cooperative perception

Vehicle interaction

Road user behavior prediction

Traffic anomaly detection

Edge computing

Methods
YOLOv3 + DeepSORT on surveillance videos
[76], YOLOv2 + SPP [77], AlexNet + optical
flow + Gaussian mixture model [78], Faster RCNN + SORT [81]
AlexNet + YOLO [87], AlexNet + VGGNet [88],
YOLO + Mask R-CNN [89], YOLOv3 [90],
YOLOv4 [63], Faster R-CNN [91]
Sparse R-CNN [98], YOLOv3 [99], SegNet + UNet [100], Faster R-CNN + Inception-Resnet-v2
[103], CNN + ConvLSTM [106], GAN [108]
YOLACT [132], CenterMask [133], Path Aggregation Network [134], ESE-Seg [136]
Early fusion [151], DiscoNet [152], Intermediate
fusion F-Cooper [153], V2V intermediate fusion
[154], Attentive intermediate fusion [155], V2X
+ Vision transformer [150], Late fusion [156]
YOLOv3 + optical flow [13], Dynamic Spatial
Assistance (DSA) RNN [160], YOLOv3 + Gaussian velocity field + hidden semi-Markov [161],
spatio-temporal attention guidance + YLOv3
[14], Domain adaptation + GAN [96], Gated
recurrent unit + CNN [164], Retinex + YOLOv3
[165], optical flow + CNN + LSTM [15], ResNet
[168]
LSTM + CNN [74], LSTM + SVM [171],
Switching Linear Dynamical System + bayesian
network [172], YOLO + LSTM + random forest
[173], Transformer [176]
Gaussian mixture model + Optical flow [179],
GMM background modeling + AdaBoost classifier + Modified Hausdorff Distance [65],
Locality-constrained Linear Coding + Gaussian
distribution model [180], YOLOv5 + decision
tree + adaptive thresholding [69], ResNet50 +
spatial-temporal matrix discriminating module
[181], spatio-temporal convolutional autoencoder
+ LSTM [185]
Integer linear programming + fast heuristics
[186], SSD + SORT [187], Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient + V2V networking [188], cloudedge hybrid + Global foreground modeling +
Gaussian mixture model [189], YOLOv3 [190],
federated learning [191], spectral clustering compression [192]

VI. F UTURE D IRECTIONS
A. For solving data challenges
While a large quantity of data is essential for training deep
learning models, often the quality is the limiting factor in
training performance. Data curation is a necessary process to
include edge cases and train the model on representative data
from the real world. Labeling vision data, especially in complex urban environments is a labor-intensive task performed
by humans. It can be sped up by first using existing object
detection or segmentation algorithms based on the relevant
task to automatically label the data. Then this can be further
checked by humans to eliminate errors by the machine, thus
creating a useful labeled dataset. There is also a need for
datasets that include multiple sensors from different views
for training cooperative perception algorithms. Collecting such

Main Challenges
Single metric for performance evaluation,
weather and illumination, realtime video
processing, diversity of surveillance camera view
angles
Multi-lane highways with exits or barriers, parked
vehicles, lack of lane markings, weather and illumination, realtime processing, variety of surveillance camera angles
Weather, shadows, complex road environment,
occlusion, small objects, degraded lane markings,
motion blur
Accuracy vs. processing speed trade-off, occlusion, illumination, shadows, weather, lack of generalizability
Delay, packet loss, calibration, synchronization,
non-overlapping points of view, computational
cost
Lack of near-crash data or other specific situations, underrepresentation of bicycles, complex
urban traffic, weather, illumination, occlusion

Lack of benchmark to evaluate methods, realtime
computation, faulty sensors, generalizability to
different driving scenarios, occlusion
Vehicles far from camera, camera angles, illumination, lack of generalizability between sparse
and dense conditions, camera shaking by wind

Power consumption, heterogeneous data sources,
cybersecurity, wireless noise, scalability, neural
network pruning and model compression, installation and maintenance costs

data is bound to be challenging because of hardware requirements and synchronization issues but it is possible to do with
connected vehicles and instrumented intersections similar to
the configuration that will be deployed.
The problems associated with poor quality or viewing angle
of real-world cameras can be mitigated by using realistic
CCTV benchmarks and datasets that include a wide variety of surveillance footage, including synthetic video [206].
Data-driven simulators like [207] use high-fidelity datasets to
simulate cameras and LiDAR, which can be used to train
DL models with data that is hard to capture in the real
world [208]. Such an approach has shown promise in endto-end reinforcement learning of autonomous vehicle control
[209]. Domain adaptation techniques are expected to be further
extended to utilize synthetic data and conveniently collected
data.

13

Sub-fields in transfer learning, especially few-shot learning
and zero-shot learning, will be extensively applied with expert
knowledge to address the lack of data challenges, such as
corner case recognition in ITS and AD. Likewise, new unsupervised learning and semi-supervised learning models are
expected in the general field of real-world computer vision.
Future work in vision transformer explainability will allow
for more comprehensive insights based on aggregated metrics
over multiple samples [41]. Interpretability research is also
expected to evaluate differences between model-based and
model-free reinforcement learning approaches [42].
Data decentralization is a well-recognized trend in ITS. To
address issues like data privacy, large-scale data processing,
and efficiency, crowdsensing [210] and federated learning on
vision tasks [211] are unavoidable future directions in ITS and
AD. Additionally, instead of the traditional way of training
a single model for a single task, multiple downstream tasks
learning with a generalized foundation model, e.g., Florence
[212], is a promising trend to deal with various data challenges. Another mechanism is data processing parallelism in
ITS coupled with edge computing for multi-task (e.g., traffic
surveillance and road surveillance) learning [213].

in the input that correspond with the classification. Generic
solutions for explainability have been presented in [218]
for both self-attention and co-attention transformer networks.
While it is not straightforward to apply these methods to
transportation applications, some efforts have been made to
understand deep spatio-temporal neural networks dealing with
video object segmentation and action recognition quantifying
the static and dynamic information in the network and giving
insight into the models and highlighting biases learned from
datasets [219].
Cooperative sensing model development is a necessary
future direction for better perception in 3D, in order to
mitigate the effects of occlusion, noise, and sensor faults.
V2X networks and vision transformers have been used for
robust cooperative perception, which can support sensing in
connected autonomous vehicle platforms [155][150]. Connected autonomous vehicles will also host other deep learning
models that can learn from new data in a distributed manner.
Consensus-driven distributed perception is expected to make
use of future network technologies like 6G V2X, resulting
in low latency model training that can enable true level 5
autonomous vehicles [220].

B. For solving model challenges

C. For solving complex traffic environment challenges

Deep learning models are trained until they achieve good
accuracy, but real-world testing often reveals weaknesses in
edge cases and complex environmental conditions. There is
a need for online learning for such models to continue to
improve and adapt to real-world scenarios otherwise they
cannot be of practical use. If online training is not possible due
to a lack of live feedback on the correctness of the predictions,
the performance must be analyzed periodically with real data
stored and labeled by humans. This can serve as a sort of
iterative feedback loop, where the model does not need to be
significantly changed, just incrementally retrained based on the
inputs it finds most challenging. One possible way to partially
automate this would be to have multiple different redundant
architectures using the same input data to make predictions
along with confidence scores. If the outputs do not agree, or
if the confidence scores are low for a certain output, that data
point can be manually labeled and added to the training set
for the next training iteration.
Complex deep learning models deployed to edge devices
need to be more efficient through methods such as pruning
[202]. Simple pruning methods can improve CNN performance by over 30% [214]. Depending on the specific architecture, the models may also be split into different functional
blocks deployed on separate edge units to minimize bandwidth
and computation time [215]. A foreseeable future stage of edge
AI is ”model training and inference both on the edge,” without
the participation of cloud datacenters.
In recent years much work has been done towards explainable AI, especially in computer vision. CNNs have been
approached with three explainability methods: gradient-based
saliency maps, Class Activation Mapping, and Excitation
Backpropagation [216]. These methods were extended for
graph convolutional networks in [217], pointing out patterns

Multimodal sensing and cooperative perception are necessary future avenues of practical research. Different modalities
like video, LiDAR, and audio can be used in combinations to
improve the performance of methods purely based on vision.
Audio is especially useful for detecting anomalies earlier
among pedestrians like fights or commotions, and for vehicles
in crowded intersections where the visual chaos may not
immediately reveal problems like mechanical faults, or minor
accidents. Cooperative perception will allow multiple sensor
views of the same environment from different vehicles to build
a common picture that contains more information than any
single agent can perceive thus solving problems of occlusion
and illumination.
There is an increasing trend of using transfer learning
to improve model performance in real-world tasks. Initially
training the model on synthetic data and fine-tuning with taskspecific data reduces the reliability on complex, single use
deep learning models and improve real-world performance by
retraining on challenging urban scenarios. As aforementioned,
domain adaptation, zero-shot learning, few-shot learning, and
foundation models are expected transfer learning areas that
serve this purpose.
The results of unsupervised methods like in [185] can be
further improved by online learning in crowded and challenging scenarios after deployment on embedded hardware,
as there is an unlimited supply of unlabeled data. The lack
of theoretical performance analysis regarding the upper bound
on false alarm rate in complex environments is discussed as
an important aspect of deep learning methods for anomaly
detection in [221]. Future research is recommended to include
this analysis as well. It is hard to imagine complete reliance on
surveillance cameras for robust, widespread, and economical
traffic anomaly detection. The method in [222] includes traffic,

14

network, demographic, land use, and weather data sources to
detect traffic. Such ideas can be used in tandem with computer
vision applications for better overall performance.
Future directions in the application of edge computing in
ITS will consider multi-source data fusion along with online
learning [223]. Many factors like unseen shapes of vehicles,
new surrounding environments, variable traffic density, and
rare events can be too challenging for DL models [195]. This
new data could be used for online training of the system.
Traditional applications can be extended using edge computing
and IoV/IoT frameworks. Vehicle re-identification from video
is emerging as the most robust solution to occlusion [224].
However, the inclusion of more spatio-temporal information
for learning leads to greater memory and computational usage.
Tracklets from one camera view can be matched with other
views at different points in time using known features. Instead
of using a fixed window, adaptive feature aggregation based on
similarity and quality, can be generalized to many multi-object
tracking tasks [225].
Transformers are particularly useful at learning dynamic
interactions between heterogenous agents which will be particularly useful in crowded urban environments for detection and
trajectory prediction. They can also be used for the detection
of anomalies and prediction of potentially hazardous situations
like collisions in a multi-user heterogeneous scenario.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
In real-world scenarios, most of the DL computer vision
methods suffer from severe performance degradation when
facing different challenges. In this paper, we review the specific challenges for data, models, and complex environments
in ITS and autonomous driving. Many related deep learningbased computer vision methods are reviewed, summarized,
compared, and discussed. Furthermore, a number of representative deep learning-based applications of ITS and autonomous
driving are summarized and analyzed. Based on our analysis
and review, several potential future research directions are
provided. We expect that this paper could provide useful
research insights and inspire more progress in the community.
R EFERENCES
[1] N. O’Mahony, S. Campbell, A. Carvalho, S. Harapanahalli, G. V.
Hernandez, L. Krpalkova, D. Riordan, and J. Walsh, “Deep learning
vs. traditional computer vision,” in Science and information conference.
Springer, 2019, pp. 128–144.
[2] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous
driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite,” in 2012 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2012, pp. 3354–3361.
[3] M. Naphade, Z. Tang, M.-C. Chang, D. C. Anastasiu, A. Sharma,
R. Chellappa, S. Wang, P. Chakraborty, T. Huang, J.-N. Hwang et al.,
“The 2019 ai city challenge.” in CVPR workshops, vol. 8, 2019, p. 2.
[4] A. Caillot, S. Ouerghi, P. Vasseur, R. Boutteau, and Y. Dupuis,
“Survey on cooperative perception in an automotive context,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2022.
[5] Q. Yang, S. Fu, H. Wang, and H. Fang, “Machine-learning-enabled
cooperative perception for connected autonomous vehicles: Challenges
and opportunities,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 96–101, 2021.
[6] R. Ke, Real-Time Video Analytics Empowered by Machine Learning
and Edge Computing for Smart Transportation Applications. University of Washington, 2020.
[7] A. Halevy, P. Norvig, and F. Pereira, “The unreasonable effectiveness
of data,” IEEE intelligent systems, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 8–12, 2009.

[8] Z. Luo, F. Branchaud-Charron, C. Lemaire, J. Konrad, S. Li, A. Mishra,
A. Achkar, J. Eichel, and P.-M. Jodoin, “Mio-tcd: A new benchmark
dataset for vehicle classification and localization,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 5129–5141, 2018.
[9] H.-N. Hu, Q.-Z. Cai, D. Wang, J. Lin, M. Sun, P. Krahenbuhl,
T. Darrell, and F. Yu, “Joint monocular 3d vehicle detection and
tracking,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2019.
[10] Y. Yao, L. Zheng, X. Yang, M. Naphade, and T. Gedeon, “Simulating
content consistent vehicle datasets with attribute descent,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2020, pp. 775–791.
[11] Z. Zheng, M. Jiang, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Bai, X. Zhang, X. Yu,
X. Tan, Y. Yang, S. Wen et al., “Going beyond real data: A robust
visual representation for vehicle re-identification,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, 2020, pp. 598–599.
[12] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
“Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS). IEEE, 2017, pp.
23–30.
[13] L. Taccari, F. Sambo, L. Bravi, S. Salti, L. Sarti, M. Simoncini, and
A. Lori, “Classification of crash and near-crash events from dashcam
videos and telematics,” in 2018 21st International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). IEEE, 2018, pp. 2460–
2465.
[14] Y. Li, M. M. Karim, R. Qin, Z. Sun, Z. Wang, and Z. Yin,
“Crash report data analysis for creating scenario-wise, spatio-temporal
attention guidance to support computer vision-based perception of
fatal crash risks,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 151, p.
105962, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0001457520317826
[15] M. R. Ibrahim, J. Haworth, N. Christie, and T. Cheng, “Cyclingnet:
Detecting cycling near misses from video streams in complex urban
scenes with deep learning,” IET Intelligent Transport Systems, vol. 15,
no. 10, pp. 1331–1344, 2021.
[16] H. Kataoka, T. Suzuki, S. Oikawa, Y. Matsui, and Y. Satoh, “Drive
video analysis for the detection of traffic near-miss incidents,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2018, pp. 3421–3428.
[17] S. Mozaffari, O. Y. Al-Jarrah, M. Dianati, P. Jennings, and A. Mouzakitis, “Deep learning-based vehicle behavior prediction for autonomous
driving applications: A review,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 23, pp. 33–47, 1 2022.
[18] Z. Wang, Y. Wu, and Q. Niu, “Multi-sensor fusion in automated
driving: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 2847–2868, 2020.
[19] W. J. Reed, “The pareto, zipf and other power laws,” Economics letters,
vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 15–19, 2001.
[20] T. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, C. Zhao, B. Yu, J. Wang, and M. Tang,
“C2am loss: Chasing a better decision boundary for long-tail object
detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 6980–6989.
[21] L. Fu, H. Yu, F. Juefei-Xu, J. Li, Q. Guo, and S. Wang, “Let there
be light: Improved traffic surveillance via detail preserving night-today transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology, 2021.
[22] D. Mahajan, R. Girshick, V. Ramanathan, K. He, M. Paluri, Y. Li,
A. Bharambe, and L. Van Der Maaten, “Exploring the limits of weakly
supervised pretraining,” in Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 181–196.
[23] J. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Zang, Y. Cao, J. Pang, T. Gong, K. Chen, Z. Liu,
C. C. Loy, and D. Lin, “Seesaw loss for long-tailed instance segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 9695–9704.
[24] T. Wang, Y. Zhu, C. Zhao, W. Zeng, J. Wang, and M. Tang, “Adaptive
class suppression loss for long-tail object detection,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2021, pp. 3103–3112.
[25] S. Arabi, A. Haghighat, and A. Sharma, “A deep-learning-based
computer vision solution for construction vehicle detection,” ComputerAided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 753–767,
2020.
[26] Z. Wu, J. Sang, Q. Zhang, H. Xiang, B. Cai, and X. Xia, “Multi-scale
vehicle detection for foreground-background class imbalance with
improved yolov2,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 15, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/15/3336

15

[27] M. Carranza-Garcı́a, P. Lara-Benı́tez, J. Garcı́a-Gutiérrez, and J. C.
Riquelme, “Enhancing object detection for autonomous driving
by optimizing anchor generation and addressing class imbalance,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 449, pp. 229–244, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231221005191
[28] Z.-Q. Zhao, P. Zheng, S.-T. Xu, and X. Wu, “Object detection with
deep learning: A review,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3212–3232, 2019.
[29] G. Ras, M. van Gerven, and P. Haselager, “Explanation methods in
deep learning: Users, values, concerns and challenges,” in Explainable
and interpretable models in computer vision and machine learning.
Springer, 2018, pp. 19–36.
[30] W. Xu, H. Zhou, N. Cheng, F. Lyu, W. Shi, J. Chen, and X. Shen,
“Internet of vehicles in big data era,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica
Sinica, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 19–35, 2018.
[31] J. Wang, J. Cho, S. Lee, and T. Ma, “Real time services for future
cloud computing enabled vehicle networks,” in 2011 International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP),
2011, pp. 1–5.
[32] R. N. Fries, M. R. Gahrooei, M. Chowdhury, and A. J. Conway,
“Meeting privacy challenges while advancing intelligent transportation
systems,” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies,
vol. 25, pp. 34–45, 2012.
[33] M. A. Khan, I. Ullah, A. Alkhalifah, S. U. Rehman, J. A. Shah,
M. I. Uddin, M. H. Alsharif, and F. Algarni, “A provable and privacypreserving authentication scheme for uav-enabled intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18,
no. 5, pp. 3416–3425, 2021.
[34] A. Martı́nez-Ballesté, P. A. Pérez-Martı́nez, and A. Solanas, “The
pursuit of citizens’ privacy: a privacy-aware smart city is possible,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 136–141, 2013.
[35] A. Martı́nez-Ballesté, H. A. Rashwan, D. Puig, and A. P. Fullana, “Towards a trustworthy privacy in pervasive video surveillance systems,”
in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications Workshops. IEEE, 2012, pp. 914–919.
[36] S. Bianco, R. Cadene, L. Celona, and P. Napoletano, “Benchmark
analysis of representative deep neural network architectures,” IEEE
access, vol. 6, pp. 64 270–64 277, 2018.
[37] A. M. Bornstein, “Is artificial intelligence permanently inscrutable?”
Nautilus, vol. 40, 2016.
[38] X. Zhu, W. Su, L. Lu, B. Li, X. Wang, and J. Dai, “Deformable
{detr}: Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=gZ9hCDWe6ke
[39] W. Samek, T. Wiegand, and K.-R. Müller, “Explainable artificial
intelligence: Understanding, visualizing and interpreting deep learning
models,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.08296
[40] C. Rudin, “Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high
stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead,” Nature Machine
Intelligence, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 206–215, 2019.
[41] E. Aflalo, M. Du, S.-Y. Tseng, Y. Liu, C. Wu, N. Duan, and V. Lal,
“Vl-interpret: An interactive visualization tool for interpreting visionlanguage transformers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 21 406–21 415.
[42] S. Atakishiyev, M. Salameh, H. Yao, and R. Goebel, “Towards
safe, explainable, and regulated autonomous driving,” 2021. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.10518
[43] Y. Xu, X. Yang, L. Gong, H.-C. Lin, T.-Y. Wu, Y. Li, and N. Vasconcelos, “Explainable object-induced action decision for autonomous
vehicles,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
[44] Q. Dou, D. Coelho de Castro, K. Kamnitsas, and B. Glocker, “Domain generalization via model-agnostic learning of semantic features,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[45] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[46] J. Kim and J. Canny, Explainable Deep Driving by Visualizing Causal
Attention. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 173–
193. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98131-4 8
[47] V. Petsiuk, A. Das, and K. Saenko, “Rise: Randomized input
sampling for explanation of black-box models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.07421, 2018.
[48] A. D’Amour, K. Heller, D. Moldovan, B. Adlam, B. Alipanahi,
A. Beutel, C. Chen, J. Deaton, J. Eisenstein, M. D. Hoffman et al.,
“Underspecification presents challenges for credibility in modern machine learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03395, 2020.

[49] A. Kolesnikov, L. Beyer, X. Zhai, J. Puigcerver, J. Yung, S. Gelly,
and N. Houlsby, “Big transfer (bit): General visual representation
learning,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.11370
[50] X. Bai, X. Wang, X. Liu, Q. Liu, J. Song, N. Sebe, and
B. Kim, “Explainable deep learning for efficient and robust
pattern recognition: A survey of recent developments,” Pattern
Recognition, vol. 120, p. 108102, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320321002892
[51] H. Cui, V. Radosavljevic, F.-C. Chou, T.-H. Lin, T. Nguyen, T.-K.
Huang, J. Schneider, and N. Djuric, “Multimodal trajectory predictions
for autonomous driving using deep convolutional networks,” in 2019
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019,
pp. 2090–2096.
[52] K. Saleh, M. Hossny, and S. Nahavandi, “Intent prediction of vulnerable road users from motion trajectories using stacked lstm network,” in
2017 IEEE 20th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), 2017, pp. 327–332.
[53] X. Zhou, R. Ke, H. Yang, and C. Liu, “When intelligent transportation systems sensing meets edge computing: Vision and challenges,”
Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 11, 10 2021.
[54] J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally, and J. A. Guerrero-Ibañez, “Internet
of vehicles: Architecture, protocols, and security,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3701–3709, 2018.
[55] Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Maharjan, M. Alam, and T. Wu, “Deep learning
for secure mobile edge computing in cyber-physical transportation
systems,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 36–41, 2019.
[56] J. Zhang and K. B. Letaief, “Mobile edge intelligence and computing
for the internet of vehicles,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2,
pp. 246–261, 2020.
[57] S. Liu, L. Liu, J. Tang, B. Yu, Y. Wang, and W. Shi, “Edge computing
for autonomous driving: Opportunities and challenges,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1697–1716, 2019.
[58] Z. Yang and L. S. Pun-Cheng, “Vehicle detection in intelligent transportation systems and its applications under varying environments: A
review,” Image and Vision Computing, vol. 69, pp. 143–154, 2018.
[59] C.-Y. Lin, K. Muchtar, W.-Y. Lin, and Z.-Y. Jian, “Moving object detection through image bit-planes representation without thresholding,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 1404–1414, 2019.
[60] S. Song, Z. Miao, H. Yu, J. Fang, K. Zheng, C. Ma, and S. Wang, “Deep
domain adaptation based multi-spectral salient object detection,” IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, 2020.
[61] M. Hassaballah, M. A. Kenk, K. Muhammad, and S. Minaee, “Vehicle
detection and tracking in adverse weather using a deep learning
framework,” IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems,
vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4230–4242, 2020.
[62] F. Jiansheng et al., “Vision-based real-time traffic accident detection,”
in Proceeding of the 11th world congress on intelligent control and
automation. IEEE, 2014, pp. 1035–1038.
[63] E. Sonnleitner, O. Barth, A. Palmanshofer, and M. Kurz, “Traffic
measurement and congestion detection based on real-time highway
video data,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 18, p. 6270, 2020.
[64] S. Gilroy, E. Jones, and M. Glavin, “Overcoming occlusion in the
automotive environment—a review,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 23–35, 2019.
[65] A. Nowosielski, D. Frejlichowski, P. Forczmański, K. Gościewska, and
R. Hofman, “Automatic analysis of vehicle trajectory applied to visual
surveillance,” in Image Processing and Communications Challenges 7,
R. S. Choraś, Ed. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp.
89–96.
[66] N. Buch, S. A. Velastin, and J. Orwell, “A review of computer vision
techniques for the analysis of urban traffic,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 920–939, 2011.
[67] K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, and P. P. Roy, “Anomaly detection
in road traffic using visual surveillance: A survey,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 53, no. 6, dec 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3417989
[68] A. Albiol, A. Albiol, and J. M. Mossi, “Video-based traffic queue length
estimation,” 2011, pp. 1928–1932.
[69] A. Aboah, M. Shoman, V. Mandal, S. Davami, Y. Adu-Gyamfi, and
A. Sharma, “A vision-based system for traffic anomaly detection using
deep learning and decision trees,” CVPR, 2021.
[70] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, R. Du, W. Xiong, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, D. Cao, and
J. Guo, “Deep learning-based computer vision for surveillance in
its: Evaluation of state-of-the-art methods,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3027–3042, 2021.

16

[71] I. Vasiljevic, A. Chakrabarti, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Examining the
impact of blur on recognition by convolutional networks,” 2017.
[72] D. Guo, Y. Pei, K. Zheng, H. Yu, Y. Lu, and S. Wang, “Degraded image
semantic segmentation with dense-gram networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, vol. 29, pp. 782–795, 2019.
[73] Y. Ma, D. Manocha, and W. Wang, “Autorvo: Local navigation with
dynamic constraints in dense heterogeneous traffic,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.02915, 2018.
[74] R. Chandra, U. Bhattacharya, A. Bera, and D. Manocha, “Traphic:
Trajectory prediction in dense and heterogeneous traffic using weighted
interactions,” vol. 2019-June. IEEE Computer Society, 6 2019, pp.
8475–8484.
[75] P. Cai, Y. Lee, Y. Luo, and D. Hsu, “Summit: A simulator for
urban driving in massive mixed traffic,” in 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2020, pp. 4023–4029.
[76] F. Hong, C.-H. Lu, C. Liu, R.-R. Liu, and J. Wei, “A traffic surveillance
multi-scale vehicle detection object method base on encoder-decoder,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 47 664–47 674, 2020.
[77] K.-J. Kim, P.-K. Kim, Y.-S. Chung, and D.-H. Choi, “Multi-scale
detector for accurate vehicle detection in traffic surveillance data,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 78 311–78 319, 2019.
[78] X. Ke, L. Shi, W. Guo, and D. Chen, “Multi-dimensional traffic
congestion detection based on fusion of visual features and convolutional neural network,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 2157–2170, 2018.
[79] R. Ke, Z. Li, J. Tang, Z. Pan, and Y. Wang, “Real-time traffic flow
parameter estimation from uav video based on ensemble classifier and
optical flow,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 54–64, 2018.
[80] T. Tang, S. Zhou, Z. Deng, L. Lei, and H. Zou, “Arbitrary-oriented
vehicle detection in aerial imagery with single convolutional neural
networks,” Remote Sensing, vol. 9, no. 11, p. 1170, 2017.
[81] A. Fedorov, K. Nikolskaia, S. Ivanov, V. Shepelev, and A. Minbaleev,
“Traffic flow estimation with data from a video surveillance camera,”
Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2019.
[82] M. Peppa, D. Bell, T. Komar, and W. Xiao, “Urban traffic flow analysis
based on deep learning car detection from cctv image series,” in SPRS
TC IV Mid-term Symposium “3D Spatial Information Science–The
Engine of Change”. Newcastle University, 2018.
[83] A. Mhalla, T. Chateau, S. Gazzah, and N. E. B. Amara, “An embedded computer-vision system for multi-object detection in traffic
surveillance,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 4006–4018, 2018.
[84] M. V. Peppa, T. Komar, W. Xiao, P. James, C. Robson, J. Xing, and
S. Barr, “Towards an end-to-end framework of cctv-based urban traffic
volume detection and prediction,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 2, p. 629, 2021.
[85] I. Brkić, M. Miler, M. Ševrović, and D. Medak, “An analytical
framework for accurate traffic flow parameter calculation from uav
aerial videos,” Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 22, p. 3844, 2020.
[86] C. Chen, B. Liu, S. Wan, P. Qiao, and Q. Pei, “An edge traffic flow
detection scheme based on deep learning in an intelligent transportation
system,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1840–1852, 2021.
[87] P. Chakraborty, Y. O. Adu-Gyamfi, S. Poddar, V. Ahsani, A. Sharma,
and S. Sarkar, “Traffic congestion detection from camera images using
deep convolution neural networks,” Transportation Research Record,
vol. 2672, no. 45, pp. 222–231, 2018.
[88] R. Wang, K. Kashinath, M. Mustafa, A. Albert, and R. Yu, “Towards physics-informed deep learning for turbulent flow prediction,”
in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1457–1466.
[89] D. Impedovo, F. Balducci, V. Dentamaro, and G. Pirlo, “Vehicular
traffic congestion classification by visual features and deep learning
approaches: a comparison,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 23, p. 5213, 2019.
[90] C. Rashmi and C. Shantala, “Vehicle density analysis and classification
using yolov3 for smart cities,” in 2020 4th International Conference
on Electronics, Communication and Aerospace Technology (ICECA).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 980–986.
[91] Y. Gao, J. Li, Z. Xu, Z. Liu, X. Zhao, and J. Chen, “A novel imagebased convolutional neural network approach for traffic congestion
estimation,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 180, p. 115037,
2021.
[92] N. Kumar and M. Raubal, “Applications of deep learning in congestion detection, prediction and alleviation: A survey,” Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 133, p. 103432, 2021.
[93] K. Muhammad, A. Ullah, J. Lloret, J. Del Ser, and V. H. C.
de Albuquerque, “Deep learning for safe autonomous driving: Current

challenges and future directions,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4316–4336, 2020.
[94] T. Sharma, B. Debaque, N. Duclos, A. Chehri, B. Kinder, and P. Fortier,
“Deep learning-based object detection and scene perception under bad
weather conditions,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 563, 2022.
[95] C.-T. Lin, S.-W. Huang, Y.-Y. Wu, and S.-H. Lai, “Gan-based dayto-night image style transfer for nighttime vehicle detection,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
951–963, 2020.
[96] J. Li, Z. Xu, L. Fu, X. Zhou, and H. Yu, “Domain adaptation from
daytime to nighttime: A situation-sensitive vehicle detection and traffic
flow parameter estimation framework,” Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 124, p. 102946, 2021.
[97] Y. Yang, H. Luo, H. Xu, and F. Wu, “Towards real-time traffic
sign detection and classification,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
transportation systems, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 2022–2031, 2015.
[98] J. Cao, J. Zhang, and X. Jin, “A traffic-sign detection algorithm based
on improved sparse r-cnn,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 122 774–122 788,
2021.
[99] J. Wan, W. Ding, H. Zhu, M. Xia, Z. Huang, L. Tian, Y. Zhu, and
H. Wang, “An efficient small traffic sign detection method based on
yolov3,” Journal of Signal Processing Systems, vol. 93, no. 8, pp. 899–
911, 2021.
[100] U. Kamal, T. I. Tonmoy, S. Das, and M. K. Hasan, “Automatic traffic
sign detection and recognition using segu-net and a modified tversky
loss function with l1-constraint,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1467–1479, 2019.
[101] D. Tabernik and D. Skočaj, “Deep learning for large-scale traffic-sign
detection and recognition,” IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1427–1440, 2019.
[102] E. Lee and D. Kim, “Accurate traffic light detection using deep neural
network with focal regression loss,” Image and Vision Computing,
vol. 87, pp. 24–36, 2019.
[103] H.-K. Kim, J. H. Park, and H.-Y. Jung, “An efficient color space
for deep-learning based traffic light recognition,” Journal of advanced
transportation, vol. 2018, 2018.
[104] Z. Ouyang, J. Niu, Y. Liu, and M. Guizani, “Deep cnn-based real-time
traffic light detector for self-driving vehicles,” IEEE transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 300–313, 2019.
[105] K. Wang, X. Tang, S. Zhao, and Y. Zhou, “Simultaneous detection
and tracking using deep learning and integrated channel feature for
ambint traffic light recognition,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and
Humanized Computing, pp. 1–11, 2021.
[106] Q. Zou, H. Jiang, Q. Dai, Y. Yue, L. Chen, and Q. Wang, “Robust lane
detection from continuous driving scenes using deep neural networks,”
IEEE transactions on vehicular technology, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 41–54,
2019.
[107] L. Tabelini, R. Berriel, T. M. Paixao, C. Badue, A. F. De Souza, and
T. Oliveira-Santos, “Keep your eyes on the lane: Real-time attentionguided lane detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 294–302.
[108] M. Ghafoorian, C. Nugteren, N. Baka, O. Booij, and M. Hofmann, “Elgan: Embedding loss driven generative adversarial networks for lane
detection,” in proceedings of the european conference on computer
vision (ECCV) Workshops, 2018, pp. 0–0.
[109] G. Brazil, X. Yin, and X. Liu, “Illuminating pedestrians via simultaneous detection & segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 4950–4959.
[110] L. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Liang, and K. He, “Is faster r-cnn doing well
for pedestrian detection?” in European conference on computer vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 443–457.
[111] G. Brazil and X. Liu, “Pedestrian detection with autoregressive network
phases,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 7231–7240.
[112] D. Chen, S. Zhang, W. Ouyang, J. Yang, and Y. Tai, “Person search via
a mask-guided two-stream cnn model,” in Proceedings of the european
conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 734–750.
[113] X. Wang, T. Xiao, Y. Jiang, S. Shao, J. Sun, and C. Shen, “Repulsion
loss: Detecting pedestrians in a crowd,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp.
7774–7783.
[114] C. Lin, J. Lu, G. Wang, and J. Zhou, “Graininess-aware deep feature
learning for pedestrian detection,” in Proceedings of the European
conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 732–747.
[115] W. Liu, S. Liao, W. Hu, X. Liang, and X. Chen, “Learning efficient
single-stage pedestrian detectors by asymptotic localization fitting,” in

17

Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
2018, pp. 618–634.
[116] Z.-Q. Zhao, P. Zheng, S.-t. Xu, and X. Wu, “Object detection with
deep learning: A review,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and
learning systems, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3212–3232, 2019.
[117] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Spatial pyramid pooling in deep
convolutional networks for visual recognition,” IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1904–
1916, 2015.
[118] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
“Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017,
pp. 2117–2125.
[119] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Mask r-cnn,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
2017, pp. 2961–2969.
[120] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
once: Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 779–
788.
[121] W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C.-Y. Fu,
and A. C. Berg, “Ssd: Single shot multibox detector,” in European
conference on computer vision. Springer, 2016, pp. 21–37.
[122] Z. Shen, Z. Liu, J. Li, Y.-G. Jiang, Y. Chen, and X. Xue, “Dsod: Learning deeply supervised object detectors from scratch,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp.
1919–1927.
[123] S. Brahmbhatt, H. I. Christensen, and J. Hays, “Stuffnet: Using
‘stuff’to improve object detection,” in 2017 IEEE Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). IEEE, 2017, pp. 934–943.
[124] S. Bell, C. L. Zitnick, K. Bala, and R. Girshick, “Inside-outside net:
Detecting objects in context with skip pooling and recurrent neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 2874–2883.
[125] T. Kong, A. Yao, Y. Chen, and F. Sun, “Hypernet: Towards accurate
region proposal generation and joint object detection,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2016, pp. 845–853.
[126] D. Temel, M.-H. Chen, and G. AlRegib, “Traffic sign detection under
challenging conditions: A deeper look into performance variations and
spectral characteristics,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 3663–3673, 2019.
[127] Z. Ou, F. Xiao, B. Xiong, S. Shi, and M. Song, “Famn: feature
aggregation multipath network for small traffic sign detection,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 178 798–178 810, 2019.
[128] Y. Mo, G. Han, H. Zhang, X. Xu, and W. Qu, “Highlight-assisted
nighttime vehicle detection using a multi-level fusion network and label
hierarchy,” Neurocomputing, vol. 355, pp. 13–23, 2019.
[129] A. Bell, T. Mantecón, C. Dı́az, C. R. del Blanco, F. Jaureguizar, and
N. Garcı́a, “A novel system for nighttime vehicle detection based on
foveal classifiers with real-time performance,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2021.
[130] G. Li, Z. Ji, and X. Qu, “Stepwise domain adaptation (sda) for object
detection in autonomous vehicles using an adaptive centernet,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2022.
[131] W. Gu, S. Bai, and L. Kong, “A review on 2d instance segmentation
based on deep neural networks,” Image and Vision Computing, p.
104401, 2022.
[132] D. Bolya, C. Zhou, F. Xiao, and Y. J. Lee, “Yolact: Real-time
instance segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
conference on computer vision, 2019, pp. 9157–9166.
[133] Y. Lee and J. Park, “Centermask: Real-time anchor-free instance segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2020, pp. 13 906–13 915.
[134] S. Liu, L. Qi, H. Qin, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Path aggregation network
for instance segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 8759–8768.
[135] S. Peng, W. Jiang, H. Pi, X. Li, H. Bao, and X. Zhou, “Deep snake
for real-time instance segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp.
8533–8542.
[136] W. Xu, H. Wang, F. Qi, and C. Lu, “Explicit shape encoding for
real-time instance segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 5168–5177.
[137] J. Dai, K. He, and J. Sun, “Instance-aware semantic segmentation via
multi-task network cascades,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 3150–3158.

[138] K. Chen, J. Pang, J. Wang, Y. Xiong, X. Li, S. Sun, W. Feng, Z. Liu,
J. Shi, W. Ouyang et al., “Hybrid task cascade for instance segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 4974–4983.
[139] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Kan, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Self-supervised
equivariant attention mechanism for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 12 275–12 284.
[140] G. Sun, W. Wang, J. Dai, and L. Van Gool, “Mining cross-image
semantics for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in European
conference on computer vision. Springer, 2020, pp. 347–365.
[141] M. Chen, H. Xue, and D. Cai, “Domain adaptation for semantic
segmentation with maximum squares loss,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp.
2090–2099.
[142] Y. Liu, W. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Source-free domain adaptation for
semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 1215–1224.
[143] D. Feng, C. Haase-Schütz, L. Rosenbaum, H. Hertlein, C. Glaeser,
F. Timm, W. Wiesbeck, and K. Dietmayer, “Deep multi-modal object
detection and semantic segmentation for autonomous driving: Datasets,
methods, and challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1341–1360, 2020.
[144] T. Cortinhal, F. Kurnaz, and E. E. Aksoy, “Semantics-aware multimodal domain translation: From lidar point clouds to panoramic color
images,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 3032–3048.
[145] C. Yu, J. Wang, C. Peng, C. Gao, G. Yu, and N. Sang, “Bisenet:
Bilateral segmentation network for real-time semantic segmentation,” in
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV),
2018, pp. 325–341.
[146] Y. Nirkin, L. Wolf, and T. Hassner, “Hyperseg: Patch-wise hypernetwork for real-time semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 4061–4070.
[147] G. Gao, G. Xu, Y. Yu, J. Xie, J. Yang, and D. Yue, “Mscfnet: a
lightweight network with multi-scale context fusion for real-time semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2021.
[148] H. Wan, L. Gao, M. Su, Q. You, H. Qu, and Q. Sun, “A novel neural
network model for traffic sign detection and recognition under extreme
conditions,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2021, 2021.
[149] C. Sun, Y. Ai, S. Wang, and W. Zhang, “Dense-refinedet for traffic sign
detection and classification,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 22, p. 6570, 2020.
[150] R. Xu, H. Xiang, Z. Tu, X. Xia, M.-H. Yang, and J. Ma, “V2x-vit:
Vehicle-to-everything cooperative perception with vision transformer,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10638, 2022.
[151] Q. Chen, S. Tang, Q. Yang, and S. Fu, “Cooper: Cooperative perception
for connected autonomous vehicles based on 3d point clouds,” in 2019
IEEE 39th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
(ICDCS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 514–524.
[152] Y. Li, S. Ren, P. Wu, S. Chen, C. Feng, and W. Zhang, “Learning
distilled collaboration graph for multi-agent perception,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, 2021.
[153] Q. Chen, X. Ma, S. Tang, J. Guo, Q. Yang, and S. Fu, “F-cooper:
Feature based cooperative perception for autonomous vehicle edge
computing system using 3d point clouds,” in Proceedings of the 4th
ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing, 2019, pp. 88–100.
[154] T.-H. Wang, S. Manivasagam, M. Liang, B. Yang, W. Zeng, and
R. Urtasun, “V2vnet: Vehicle-to-vehicle communication for joint perception and prediction,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2020, pp. 605–621.
[155] R. Xu, H. Xiang, X. Xia, X. Han, J. Liu, and J. Ma, “Opv2v: An open
benchmark dataset and fusion pipeline for perception with vehicle-tovehicle communication,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07644, 2021.
[156] A. Rauch, F. Klanner, R. Rasshofer, and K. Dietmayer, “Car2x-based
perception in a high-level fusion architecture for cooperative perception
systems,” in 2012 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium. IEEE, 2012,
pp. 270–275.
[157] G. Thandavarayan, M. Sepulcre, and J. Gozalvez, “Generation of
cooperative perception messages for connected and automated vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 12, pp.
16 336–16 341, 2020.
[158] D. D. Yoon, B. Ayalew, and G. M. N. Ali, “Performance of decentralized cooperative perception in v2v connected traffic,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2021.

18

[159] P. Zhou, P. Kortoçi, Y.-P. Yau, B. Finley, X. Wang, T. Braud, L.H. Lee, S. Tarkoma, J. Kangasharju, and P. Hui, “Aicp: Augmented
informative cooperative perception,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2022.
[160] F.-H. Chan, Y.-T. Chen, Y. Xiang, and M. Sun, “Anticipating accidents in dashcam videos,” in Asian Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 136–153.
[161] C. Zhang, J. Zhu, W. Wang, and D. Zhao, “A general framework of
learning multi-vehicle interaction patterns from video,” in 2019 IEEE
Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), 2019, pp. 4323–
4328.
[162] Z. Zhang, C. Trivedi, and X. Liu, “Automated detection of gradecrossing-trespassing near misses based on computer vision analysis
of surveillance video data,” Safety Science, vol. 110, pp. 276–285, 12
2018.
[163] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-image
translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp.
2223–2232.
[164] J. G. Choi, C. W. Kong, G. Kim, and S. Lim, “Car crash detection
using ensemble deep learning and multimodal data from dashboard
cameras,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 183, p. 115400, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S095741742100823X
[165] C. Wang, Y. Dai, W. Zhou, and Y. Geng, “A vision-based video crash
detection framework for mixed traffic flow environment considering
low-visibility condition,” Journal of advanced transportation, vol.
2020, 2020.
[166] D. Singh and C. K. Mohan, “Deep spatio-temporal representation
for detection of road accidents using stacked autoencoder,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
879–887, 2019.
[167] S. Yamamoto, T. Kurashima, and H. Toda, “Classifying near-miss
traffic incidents through video, sensor, and object features,” IEICE
Transactions on Information and Systems, vol. E105.D, no. 2, pp. 377–
386, 2022.
[168] T. Suzuki, Y. Aoki, and H. Kataoka, “Pedestrian near-miss analysis on
vehicle-mounted driving recorders,” in 2017 Fifteenth IAPR International Conference on Machine Vision Applications (MVA), 2017, pp.
416–419.
[169] X. Li, X. Ying, and M. C. Chuah, “Grip: Graph-based interactionaware trajectory prediction,” IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems
Conference (ITSC), 2019.
[170] J. Colyar and J. Halkias, “Us highway 101 dataset,” Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), Tech. Rep. FHWA-HRT-07-030, pp. 27–69,
2007.
[171] P. Tripicchio and S. D’Avella, “Modeling multiple vehicle interaction
constraints for behavior prediction of vehicles on highways,”
Computers & Electrical Engineering, vol. 98, p. 107700, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0045790622000192
[172] J. F. Kooij, F. Flohr, E. A. Pool, and D. M. Gavrila, “Context-based path
prediction for targets with switching dynamics,” International Journal
of Computer Vision, vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 239–262, 2019.
[173] D. Choi, J. Yim, M. Baek, and S. Lee, “Machine learning-based
vehicle trajectory prediction using v2v communications and on-board
sensors,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 4, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/4/420
[174] R. Chandra, U. Bhattacharya, C. Roncal, A. Bera, and D. Manocha,
“Robusttp: End-to-end trajectory prediction for heterogeneous roadagents in dense traffic with noisy sensor inputs,” in ACM Computer
Science in Cars Symposium, ser. CSCS ’19. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359999.3360495
[175] T. Fernando, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes, “Deep inverse
reinforcement learning for behavior prediction in autonomous driving:
Accurate forecasts of vehicle motion,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 87–96, 2021.
[176] Y. Liu, J. Zhang, L. Fang, Q. Jiang, and B. Zhou, “Multimodal motion
prediction with stacked transformers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp.
7577–7586.
[177] B. Liu, E. Adeli, Z. Cao, K.-H. Lee, A. Shenoi, A. Gaidon, and J. C.
Niebles, “Spatiotemporal relationship reasoning for pedestrian intent
prediction,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
3485–3492, 2020.

[178] S. K. Jayaraman, D. M. Tilbury, X. Jessie Yang, A. K. Pradhan, and
L. P. Robert, “Analysis and prediction of pedestrian crosswalk behavior
during automated vehicle interactions,” in 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2020, pp. 6426–6432.
[179] M. S. Shirazi and B. Morris, “Vision-based vehicle queue analysis at
junctions,” in 2015 12th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS), 2015, pp. 1–6.
[180] Y. Li, W. Liu, and Q. Huang, “Traffic anomaly detection based
on image descriptor in videos,” Multimedia Tools and Applications,
vol. 75, pp. 2487–2505, 3 2016.
[181] S. Bai, Z. He, Y. Lei, W. Wu, C. Zhu, M. Sun, and J. Yan, “Traffic
anomaly detection via perspective map based on spatial-temporal
information matrix.” in CVPR Workshops, 2019, pp. 117–124.
[182] Y. Li, J. Wu, X. Bai, X. Yang, X. Tan, G. Li, S. Wen, H. Zhang, and
E. Ding, “Multi-granularity tracking with modularlized components
for unsupervised vehicles anomaly detection,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, 2020, pp. 586–587.
[183] Y. Zhao, W. Wu, Y. He, Y. Li, X. Tan, and S. Chen, “Good practices and
a strong baseline for traffic anomaly detection,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 3993–4001.
[184] B. Li, S. Leroux, and P. Simoens, “Decoupled appearance and
motion learning for efficient anomaly detection in surveillance video,”
Computer Vision and Image Understanding, vol. 210, p. 103249, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S107731422100093X
[185] K. Pawar and V. Attar, “Deep learning based detection and localization
of road accidents from traffic surveillance videos,” ICT Express, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2405959521001478
[186] M. Cui, S. Zhong, B. Li, X. Chen, and K. Huang, “Offloading
autonomous driving services via edge computing,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, pp. 10 535–10 547, 10 2020.
[187] R. Ke, Z. Cui, Y. Chen, M. Zhu, H. Yang, and Y. Wang, “Edge
computing for real-time near-crash detection for smart transportation
applications,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.
00549
[188] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, G. Qiao, and Y. Zhang, “Artificial
intelligence empowered edge computing and caching for internet of
vehicles,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, pp. 12–18, 6 2019.
[189] G. Liu, H. Shi, A. Kiani, A. Khreishah, J. Lee, N. Ansari, C. Liu, and
M. M. Yousef, “Smart traffic monitoring system using computer vision
and edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[190] S. Wan, S. Ding, and C. Chen, “Edge computing enabled video
segmentation for real-time traffic monitoring in internet of vehicles,”
Pattern Recognition, vol. 121, p. 108146, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320321003332
[191] P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan, B. Avent, A. Bellet, M. Bennis,
A. N. Bhagoji, K. Bonawitz, Z. Charles, G. Cormode, R. Cummings,
R. G. L. D’Oliveira, H. Eichner, S. E. Rouayheb, D. Evans,
J. Gardner, Z. Garrett, A. Gascón, B. Ghazi, P. B. Gibbons,
M. Gruteser, Z. Harchaoui, C. He, L. He, Z. Huo, B. Hutchinson,
J. Hsu, M. Jaggi, T. Javidi, G. Joshi, M. Khodak, J. Konečný,
A. Korolova, F. Koushanfar, S. Koyejo, T. Lepoint, Y. Liu, P. Mittal,
M. Mohri, R. Nock, A. Özgür, R. Pagh, M. Raykova, H. Qi,
D. Ramage, R. Raskar, D. Song, W. Song, S. U. Stich, Z. Sun,
A. T. Suresh, F. Tramèr, P. Vepakomma, J. Wang, L. Xiong,
Z. Xu, Q. Yang, F. X. Yu, H. Yu, and S. Zhao, “Advances and
open problems in federated learning,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04977
[192] C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wan, J. Luan, and Q. Pei, “Traffic flow prediction
based on deep learning in internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3776–3789, 2021.
[193] H. Sun, W. Shi, X. Liang, and Y. Yu, “Vu: Edge computing-enabled
video usefulness detection and its application in large-scale video
surveillance systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 800–817, 2020.
[194] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, R. Du, W. Xiong, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, D. Cao, and
J. Guo, “Deep learning-based computer vision for surveillance in
its: Evaluation of state-of-the-art methods,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3027–3042, 2021.
[195] A. Ferdowsi, U. Challita, and W. Saad, “Deep learning for reliable mobile edge analytics in intelligent transportation systems: An overview,”
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 62–70, 2019.

19

[196] K. C. Dey, A. Rayamajhi, M. Chowdhury, P. Bhavsar, and
J. Martin, “Vehicle-to-vehicle (v2v) and vehicle-to-infrastructure
(v2i) communication in a heterogeneous wireless network –
performance evaluation,” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, vol. 68, pp. 168–184, 2016. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968090X16300018
[197] R. Ke, Y. Zhuang, Z. Pu, and Y. Wang, “A smart, efficient, and
reliable parking surveillance system with edge artificial intelligence on
iot devices,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 4962–4974, 2021.
[198] H. Bura, N. Lin, N. Kumar, S. Malekar, S. Nagaraj, and K. Liu,
“An edge based smart parking solution using camera networks and
deep learning,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Cognitive
Computing (ICCC), 2018, pp. 17–24.
[199] J. Konečný, B. McMahan, and D. Ramage, “Federated
optimization:distributed optimization beyond the datacenter,” 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.03575
[200] M. Song, K. Zhong, J. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Wang,
and T. Li, “In-situ ai: Towards autonomous and incremental deep
learning for iot systems,” in 2018 IEEE International Symposium on
High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2018, pp. 92–103.
[201] J. Barthélemy, N. Verstaevel, H. Forehead, and P. Perez, “Edgecomputing video analytics for real-time traffic monitoring in a
smart city,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 9, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/9/2048
[202] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. Dally, “Learning both weights
and connections for efficient neural network,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee,
M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett, Eds., vol. 28. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2015. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/
file/ae0eb3eed39d2bcef4622b2499a05fe6-Paper.pdf
[203] S. Zhang, Z. Du, L. Zhang, H. Lan, S. Liu, L. Li, Q. Guo, T. Chen, and
Y. Chen, “Cambricon-x: An accelerator for sparse neural networks,” in
2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2016, pp. 1–12.
[204] J. Zhou, H.-N. Dai, and H. Wang, “Lightweight convolution neural
networks for mobile edge computing in transportation cyber physical
systems,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10, no. 6, oct 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3339308
[205] K. Zhang, H. Ying, H.-N. Dai, L. Li, Y. Peng, K. Guo, and H. Yu,
“Compacting deep neural networks for internet of things: Methods
and applications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 15,
pp. 11 935–11 959, 2021.
[206] J. Revaud and M. Humenberger, “Robust automatic monocular vehicle speed estimation for traffic surveillance,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
October 2021, pp. 4551–4561.
[207] A. Amini, T.-H. Wang, I. Gilitschenski, W. Schwarting, Z. Liu,
S. Han, S. Karaman, and D. Rus, “Vista 2.0: An open, data-driven
simulator for multimodal sensing and policy learning for autonomous
vehicles,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.12083
[208] T. Azfar, J. Weidner, A. Raheem, R. Ke, and R. L. Cheu, “Efficient
procedure of building university campus models for digital twin simulation,” IEEE Journal of Radio Frequency Identification, 2022.
[209] A. Amini, I. Gilitschenski, J. Phillips, J. Moseyko, R. Banerjee,
S. Karaman, and D. Rus, “Learning robust control policies for end-toend autonomous driving from data-driven simulation,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1143–1150, 2020.
[210] Z. Ning, S. Sun, X. Wang, L. Guo, S. Guo, X. Hu, B. Hu, and R. Kwok,
“Blockchain-enabled intelligent transportation systems: a distributed
crowdsensing framework,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
2021.
[211] Y. Liu, A. Huang, Y. Luo, H. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, L. Feng, T. Chen,
H. Yu, and Q. Yang, “Fedvision: An online visual object detection
platform powered by federated learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 08, 2020, pp. 13 172–
13 179.
[212] L. Yuan, D. Chen, Y.-L. Chen, N. Codella, X. Dai, J. Gao, H. Hu,
X. Huang, B. Li, C. Li et al., “Florence: A new foundation model for
computer vision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11432, 2021.
[213] R. Ke, C. Liu, H. Yang, W. Sun, and Y. Wang, “Real-time traffic
and road surveillance with parallel edge intelligence,” IEEE Journal
of Radio Frequency Identification, 2022.
[214] H. Li, A. Kadav, I. Durdanovic, H. Samet, and H. P. Graf, “Pruning
filters for efficient convnets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08710, 2016.

[215] A. Sufian, E. Alam, A. Ghosh, F. Sultana, D. De, and M. Dong, “Deep
learning in computer vision through mobile edge computing for iot,”
in Mobile Edge Computing. Springer, 2021, pp. 443–471.
[216] J. Zhang, S. A. Bargal, Z. Lin, J. Brandt, X. Shen, and S. Sclaroff, “Topdown neural attention by excitation backprop,” International Journal
of Computer Vision, vol. 126, no. 10, pp. 1084–1102, 2018.
[217] P. E. Pope, S. Kolouri, M. Rostami, C. E. Martin, and H. Hoffmann,
“Explainability methods for graph convolutional neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 10 772–10 781.
[218] H. Chefer, S. Gur, and L. Wolf, “Generic attention-model explainability for interpreting bi-modal and encoder-decoder transformers,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2021, pp. 397–406.
[219] M. Kowal, M. Siam, M. A. Islam, N. D. Bruce, R. P. Wildes, and
K. G. Derpanis, “A deeper dive into what deep spatiotemporal networks
encode: Quantifying static vs. dynamic information,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 13 999–14 009.
[220] L. Barbieri, S. Savazzi, M. Brambilla, and M. Nicoli, “Decentralized
federated learning for extended sensing in 6g connected vehicles,”
Vehicular Communications, vol. 33, p. 100396, 2022.
[221] K. Doshi and Y. Yilmaz, “Online anomaly detection in surveillance
videos with asymptotic bound on false alarm rate,” Pattern
Recognition, vol. 114, p. 107865, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320321000522
[222] A. B. Parsa, A. Movahedi, H. Taghipour, S. Derrible, and A. K.
Mohammadian, “Toward safer highways, application of xgboost and
shap for real-time accident detection and feature analysis,” Accident
Analysis & Prevention, vol. 136, p. 105405, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0001457519311790
[223] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, R. Du, W. Xiong, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, D. Cao, and
J. Guo, “Deep learning-based computer vision for surveillance in
its: Evaluation of state-of-the-art methods,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3027–3042, 2021.
[224] J. Zhao, F. Qi, G. Ren, and L. Xu, “Phd learning: Learning with
pompeiu-hausdorff distances for video-based vehicle re-identification,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2021, pp. 2225–2235.
[225] Y. Qian, L. Yu, W. Liu, G. Kang, and A. G. Hauptmann, “Adaptive
feature aggregation for video object detection,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision
Workshops, 2020, pp. 143–147.

