Artificial and beneficial – Exploiting artificial images for aerial vehicle detection
Immanuel Webera,∗, Jens Bongartza , Ribana Roscherb
a Application Center for Machine Learning and Sensor Technology, University of Applied Sciences Koblenz, 53424 Remagen, Germany
b Institute of Geodesy and Geoinformation, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany

arXiv:2104.03054v1 [cs.CV] 7 Apr 2021

Abstract
Object detection in aerial images is an important task in environmental, economic, and infrastructure-related tasks. One of the most
prominent applications is the detection of vehicles, for which deep learning approaches are increasingly used. A major challenge in
such approaches is the limited amount of data that arises, for example, when more specialized and rarer vehicles such as agricultural
machinery or construction vehicles are to be detected. This lack of data contrasts with the enormous data hunger of deep learning
methods in general and object recognition in particular. In this article, we address this issue in the context of the detection of road
vehicles in aerial images. To overcome the lack of annotated data, we propose a generative approach that generates top-down images
by overlaying artificial vehicles created from 2D CAD drawings on artificial or real backgrounds. Our experiments with a modified
RetinaNet object detection network show that adding these images to small real-world datasets significantly improves detection
performance. In cases of very limited or even no real-world images, we observe an improvement in average precision of up to
0.70 points. We address the remaining performance gap to real-world datasets by analyzing the effect of the image composition of
background and objects and give insights into the importance of background.
Keywords: Object detection, deep learning, data generation, multi-source learning

1. Introduction
Object detection in aerial images plays a significant role in
remote sensing applications like traffic monitoring, infrastructure surveillance, and environmental protection [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
Modern object detectors, based on deep neural networks, like
the families of methods evolving around Faster R-CNN [6],
RetinaNet [7] or YOLO [8], with more recent variants like EfficentDet [9] and YOLOv4 [10], have proven their capabilities
in general benchmarks containing earth-bound imagery [7, 11],
and also in specific aerial image benchmarks [12, 13, 14]. However, like most machine learning and especially deep learning
methods, they generally require vast amounts of data to learn
from [15]. Also, object detection is a supervised task that
requires annotated data, which typically involves human labor. The lack of annotated data is often present and a problem for many real-world applications, and therefore a potential
inhibitor for wider acceptance of deep learning solutions [3].
For tasks like vehicle detection in aerial images, the challenge is particularly apparent if certain types of vehicles are to
be identified. Focusing on road vehicles and considering the
distribution of specific vehicle types in the real world, we see
that cars and trucks occur most often. In contrast, more specialized vehicles like agricultural machinery, construction vehicles,
or municipal vehicles are scarce. Even without a finer class subdivision than these rough categories, it is clear that an unbal∗ Corresponding author

Email addresses: immanuel.weber@hs-koblenz.de (Immanuel
Weber), bongartz@hs-koblenz.de (Jens Bongartz),
ribana.roscher@uni-bonn.de (Ribana Roscher)
Preprint submitted to ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing

anced long-tail distribution is present. Besides the scarcity of
specific classes, we are also challenged by a large intra-class variety due to different vehicle colors, shapes, and varying scenery
resulting from the different landscape, background structures,
weather, and various lighting conditions. As a result, collecting
data covering the whole intra-class variety is associated with
intensive acquisition and annotation work. To overcome this
challenge, much work is put into topics targeting a lack of data
from different perspectives [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. A particularly promising approach is the generation of annotated data,
which enables a flexible creation of data samples for classes
underrepresented or missing.
In this paper, we detect vehicles in aerial images, where a
generative approach is utilized to create artificial images in order to overcome the challenge of limited annotated data. Our
main objective is to provide a better understanding of the effect
of a lack of data and to what extent artificial data can compensate this effect. For this purpose, we utilize and modify the
ISPRS Potsdam dataset [22] that contains a large number of objects and images. We focus on only one class, cars, that allows
us to simulate a lack of data and determine the difference between various training dataset sizes. In this way, we mimic rare
classes such as agricultural machinery or construction vehicles
but do not have to constrain our analyses due to lack of data. We
propose an image generator that uses simplified 2D computeraided-design (CAD) drawings to create images that boost the
model’s training. In order to approach the phenomenon of rare
objects even in the actually common vehicle class, we use here
only a few 2D CAD drawings. The latter also takes into account
the possible limited accessibility or diversity of these drawings.
April 8, 2021

We will show that simple 2D CAD drawings are effective when
used alone or in combination with small numbers of real images to train an accurate object detector. Moreover, we will
demonstrate that the background has a significant impact on the
achievable performance, and we investigate further into the interplay of objects and background in object detection.
Our contributions are as follows:

Transfer-learning. An approach to shorten training times is
transfer-learning, which can help jump-start model training using decent pre-trained models that have already captured key vision features. As a result, trained models generalize better also
to smaller datasets [31, 32]. However, Shen et al. [33] show
that this is not always better than training from scratch if one
can forgo shorter training times. It remains an open research
question to what extent this holds for small datasets.

• We introduce an image generator for top-down images
which uses simplified 2D CAD drawings to create artificial images suitable for training an object detector. The
approach can be extended to an arbitrary amount of classes
and is especially promising for rare classes.

Domain adaption. This group of methods tries to transfer data
and knowledge from one domain to another, which is useful if
high quality, annotated datasets exist in a domain other than the
target domain. Methods like CORAL [17], which have been
successfully applied to aerial object detection [20], or the generative adversarial network-based CycleGAN [34], work in a
semi-supervised manner. These methods have in common that
by transferring the existing images from one to another domain,
the annotations can be reused, and hence no new annotation
work is required.

• We provide an analysis about the correlation of dataset
size and object detection performance, and the impact of
adding artificial images.
• We provide insights into the importance of image composition, especially regarding the background, and point to
promising direction to further improve the detection performance.

Semi-supervised learning. Most tasks, like image classification, object detection, or semantic segmentation, are supervised
tasks. In contrast to that, semi-supervised learning methods also
utilize information from large unlabeled datasets, which has
proven successful, especially for small labeled datasets from
the same domain. Methods like MixMatch, FixMatch [35, 36],
STAC [37], SimCLR [38] or Noisy Student [18] use labeled
data for model training and let them make predictions on unlabeled ones. Based on different approaches, they then use these
predictions to improve the underlying models.

The paper is structured as follows: We first give an overview
of relevant work and relate our approach to them in Section
2. We continue by describing our object detector and proposed
image generator in Section 3. In Section 4 we introduce the
real-world dataset which is used for our experiments. We evaluate our artificial imagery’s effect on our task and analyze it in
detail in Section 5. Section 6 closes this work with our final
conclusions and directions for future work.

Artificial image generation. All of the approaches above have
in common that they require existing annotated data. This
is different for artificial image generation methods that can
create new images to extend existing datasets or build new
datasets from scratch. They allow the automation of the generation of images and annotations and, therefore, be easier and
cheaper than real data acquisition. Classic computer graphic
approaches, like 3D rendering engines [19, 39, 40, 41], but
also video games [42], can create photo-realistic images that
are useful for a variety of domains including aerial images [43].
Whereas the image generation process can be automated, the
underlying artificial scenes’ design requires 3D models, textures, and potentially human labor. However, it also gives complete control over the content of the images.

2. Related work
As indicated initially, the lack of data is a core problem of
many deep learning applications. Since data shortage has different aspects, various approaches have been proposed to overcome this problem. In the following, we group relevant works
and discuss their intended use. Moreover, we position our work
and relate it to the discussed approaches.
Image augmentation. Simple methods like flipping, cropping,
and color changes of existing images, documented in works like
AlexNet [23] and ResNet [24] are commonly used nowadays
and are required to let models generalize well even on datasets
of the size of ImageNet [25]. The random expansion and cropping augmentation used with the Single Shot MultiBox Detector [26], a predecessor of the RetinaNet, was one of the keys
to its success. Several more complex augmentation methods
[16, 27, 28, 29], of whom especially mixup [30] and Random
Image Cropping and Patching (RICAP, [16]) are suitable for
object detection, highlighted that well-designed augmentations
have the potential to improve performance significantly, particularly in the long run.

Generative adversarial networks. Generative adversarial networks (GANs, [44]) are less a separate group but can be used
in most of the presented approaches. They have proven to be
powerful [21, 45, 46], however, as they are a learning-based
approach, they also require relevant data in a sufficient amount
and are bound to the distribution of that data.
Further approaches. Further methods exist that address other
aspects that are helpful for data shortage. Examples are image harmonization using deep image priors [47, 48] or few-shot
learning methods [49], that try to reduce the amount of data
needed for training to a minimum. However, new data, outside
2

of existing distributions, can only be created with the rendering
methods described before or other methods that can introduce
out-of-distribution content.

become spatially progressively smaller, they form the pyramid
with respective denotation. This pyramid for a ResNet with its
feature maps C1 to C5 is shown in Figure 1 on the left. By
applying convolution and up-sampling steps, as shown in the
figure on the right, these feature maps, P2 to P7 , are enriched
to transfer information from higher to lower pyramid feature
maps. The vanilla RetinaNet has a feature pyramid with the

Relation to our approach. None of these approaches will probably solve the issue of lacking data alone, but a combination can
help achieve its intended success. For our situation, in which
many rare classes may exist, and no access to large amounts of
data is available, we consider the generation of artificial images
as the most promising approach that, however, can still be combined with other methods. Once a suitable number of images
with objects from the required distribution is available, GANbased image refinement [45] and image augmentation [21], image harmonization [48] and domain adaption [20] can come
into play to be applied on top of these artificial images to bridge
gaps between these and real images.

P7 [3 × 3 × 256]
P6 [5 × 5 × 256]
C5 [10 × 10 × 2048]
P5 [10 × 10 × 256]
C4 [19 × 19 × 1024]
P4 [19 × 19 × 256]
C3 [38 × 38 × 512]
P3 [38 × 38 × 256]
C2 [75 × 75 × 256]
P2 [75 × 75 × 256]
C1 [75 × 75 × 64]

3. Framework

upsample 2×

Input [300 × 300 × 3]

In the following, we will introduce our framework, which
consists of two main components: an object detector and an
image generator. Most object detection networks, such as the
RetinaNet that we have chosen, are in principle suitable for our
task. However, we modified the network to improve its performance for our application, which is described in section 3.1. In
section 3.2, we present the image generation process and the
underlying data.

conv. 2D 1 × 1

Figure 1: Modified feature pyramid – The left, blue feature maps, C1 to C5 , are
computed with the ResNet feature extractor’s convolutional blocks. The right,
yellow stack is the actual feature pyramid with feature maps P2 to P7 . P5 to P6
are computed using standard 2D convolutions that reduce spatial or depth extent. The bottom right box shows the computation of the Pi . The gray-colored
feature maps are the ones we removed. The dashed lines mark our extensions,
and the darker yellow feature map is used for feature map computation but not
for the subsequent prediction. The sizes of the feature maps, also provided in
the braces, match proportionally, but the input is only partially visible.

3.1. Object detector
In our framework, we aim for an object detector designed to
perform well on aerial images. Although many object detectors
specialized for aerial images have been proposed in the past
(see, e.g., [4], [50]), we observe that standard object detectors
with small modifications are suitable for our data. We decide to
use the RetinaNet [7] for this work and modify it accordingly.
Unlike networks of the Faster R-CNN family [6], RetinaNet is a
single-step process, i.e., it does not require an intermediate step
like region proposal networks and therefore can be trained endto-end. It does not use direct regression to locate objects but
instead uses support points distributed throughout the image,
called anchors, to regress the position and size of detections
relative to these anchors. The vanilla RetinaNet is designed for
common datasets like MS COCO [11], which typically contain
earthbound imagery. In contrast, our aerial images, for example, have a different perspective and scale [4], which we take
into account with the following modifications.
The detector’s core is a feature pyramid network [51]
that is built on a feature extraction network, like a ResNet50 [24]. Such a network usually consists of several convolutional blocks, which in sequential application reduce the spatial
resolution of an input and increase the receptive field accordingly. The basic idea of feature pyramid networks is to split
these feature extraction networks and collect the feature maps
computed by each convolutional block. This gives us access to
a set of feature maps with different receptive fields that can be
used to detect objects of different sizes. As these feature maps

five feature maps P3 to P7 . Due to the relatively small size
of the objects in our data, most of the higher feature maps do
not contribute to the detection task. This is expected, as the first
convolutional block of the feature extractor network already has
a feature map of only a fourth of the input size. Each of the
following blocks reduces it further by a factor of two. Therefore, these feature maps have an increasingly larger receptive
field and activate on larger objects and have coarser localization abilities. As shown in Figure 1, we remove the top three
feature maps P5 to P7 but add a new feature map P2 to the bottom, which works on the largest available feature map size and
thus, is having a smaller receptive field but is also able to finer
localize small objects. Also, we do not use P4 for predictions
and only use it for the top-down enrichment of P3 and P2 downstream. The final feature maps used for prediction, P2 and P3 ,
much more resemble a very shallow frustum than a pyramid but
are more efficient and improve performance slightly.
We further add two modifications that were introduced in
the works of Fully Convolutional One-Stage Object Detection (FCOS) [52] and Adaptive Training Sample Selection
(ATSS) [53]. The first is a learnable scalar for each pyramid
feature map used to scale the bounding box regression branch’s
logits to better account for different field-of-views per pyramid
level. The second is a new task branch for the prediction of the
centerness, which is a measure that describes how well an anchor is centered in its predicted bounding box. In the inference
phase, this measure is used as a weight for the anchors’ con3

fidences and results in lower confidences for predicted boxes,
which are far away from their anchor’s center. Since the predictions are ordered by their confidence, as a result, these boxes
are less likely to persist after the non-maximum-suppression,
that is used to remove multiple overlapping predictions. As the
centerness is only defined inside a bounding box, the matching
mechanism between ground truth bounding boxes and anchors
is slightly modified. Anchors, which are regarded as positive
candidates by the RetinaNet mechanism but whose centers are
outside of the ground truth bounding box, are ignored.

2D CAD drawings

(a) raw simplified drawing

(c) masked drawing

Figure 3: Preparation of a simplified 2D CAD drawing – The raw drawing (left)
is freed from size markings and irrelevant structures and reduced to the top view
(center) and then masked using distinct colors for the surface types (right).

semantic segmentation. We weigh all four losses equally in the
final loss summation. Besides, FCOS and ATSS also propose
to use a general-intersection-over-union (GIoU) based loss [55]
as a replacement for the smooth L1 loss. In [56], a completeintersection-over-union (CIoU) loss is introduced, which is said
to be superior to the GIoU loss. We evaluated the standard
smooth L1 , GIoU, and CIoU loss and, on an anecdotal level, report that they show comparable performance, whereas the latter
are decreasing much quicker while training. However, GIoU
and CIoU loss did not converge significantly faster and could
not beat the smooth L1 loss in the long run. Finally, the reference implementation of ATSS [53] uses the centerness value
as a weight for the bounding box loss, which also did not improve the performance in our case. An overview of the detector’s structure is given in Figure 2.

regression branch

artificial images

classification branch

real images
segmentation branch

training and test data

(b) cleaned top-down drawing

RetinaNet

3.2. Artificial Image Generator
In our framework, we design an artificial image generator
that is designed under the premise of creating images that support the training and, at the same time, be as simple as possible. We intend to train models that generalize to details and
variations, especially inside a class, so we do not aim to create images of high resolution or exact replicas of relevant objects. Unlike earthbound images, aerial images show scenes
from a bird’s eye view so that the majority of the information
can be found in two dimensions. We take advantage of this and
build a simple image generator without 3D models and rendering. Instead, we use simplified 2D CAD drawings, which can
be found, for example, in advertising brochures or maintenance
materials of vehicle manufacturers, of which some are available in online databases1 . These drawings or blueprints show
the vehicle’s shape and essential structure, but they are not directly suitable for digital design or rendering due to their actual
intention. We remove details and elements that are not part of
the vehicle, such as size markings, and manually create masks
for background, outline, body, lights, and windows by coloring
them with different colors. An example of this can be seen in
Figure 3. Our generator reads the processed images, slightly
simplifies them to remove further details, and re-scales them to
the intended ground sampling distance.
The first step of the actual image generation process is the
background canvas creation. We create a plain background
of size 600 × 600 px and color it in the average color of the

Figure 2: Dataset and object detector structure – On the left side, the two different data sources, real and artificial images (see Section 3.2), are shown. The
modified RetinaNet with the shallower three-level feature pyramid network
(yellow) and the additional segmentation branch (magenta) are shown on the
right side. The outputs for a single sample are shown, and the spatial extents
of the feature maps are proportional to their real size and show the spatial reduction in the pyramid. We have omitted the centerness branch and connection
details of the feature pyramid for simplicity.

We add a fourth task branch for semantic segmentation, that
we will use in Section 5.4 to gain more insights about the
learned representation of our models and which is loosely inspired by Jäger et al. [54]. It consists of a single convolutional
layer applied only to the feature pyramid level P2 . The resulting
activation maps have the size 75 × 75, a channel for each class,
and are being sigmoid activated. We derive the corresponding
annotations by rasterizing the object-aligned bounding boxes
available in our annotation data.
The RetinaNet’s structure is fully convolutional, which allows it to process input images of any size. The vanilla design
is laid out for image sizes within 800 px to 1333 px. Varying
the input size, however, requires to create a new matching anchor grid. We fix it to 300 × 300 px, which allows us to use a
fixed anchor grid and larger batch sizes due to the smaller image size. Our only modification to the anchors is that we use
four times smaller anchor sizes to account for smaller images.
We use the default RetinaNet sub-losses of smooth L1 loss for
bounding box regression and focal loss for classification. The
two new task branches’ losses are binary cross-entropy for centerness and the averaged dice and binary cross-entropy loss for

1 see for example https://drawingdatabase.com/

4

(a) Colored instance.

(b) Cut instance.

(c) Deformed instance.

Figure 4: Creation of a vehicle instance – The blueprint is first painted using
suitable colors (left), then optionally cut (center) and deformed (right). For
visualization, the object is deformed by 50 %.

Imagenet dataset. Since this color is also used to standardnormalize the images during training, it can be considered a
neutral color. We add a rough and fine noise pattern, which
both are generated from a normal distribution. The rough noise
is created on a smaller grid of size 10 × 10 with σ2 = 10, is
up-sampled to the background-size using bicubic interpolation,
and added to the background canvas, which results in a smooth
large scale undulation. The fine noise is applied per pixel with
a σ2 = 5.
In order to add objects to the background images, several
blueprints are selected randomly, and each of them is colored
with random colors considering the surface type, like standard
car colors for the body and blueish colors for the windows. The
generator draws the vehicle outlines by default black but can
optionally draw it in different colors, e.g., body color. Some
vehicles are randomly cut to 50 % to 70 % of the width or height
of the instance, as in reality, they may only be partially visible.
Since the selection of vehicles only corresponds to a tiny subset of the real distribution, we artificially increase the instances’
variation by a deformation up to ± 5 % per side. The creation
of a vehicle is shown in Figure 4. Each of the instances is randomly rotated and placed on the background canvas while ensuring they do not overlap. An overview of these steps is given
in Figure 5. Besides measuring the overall effect of the images
in Section 5.2, we will investigate the details of this pipeline,
like the σ2 of the rough noise and the deformation value, in
Section 5.3.
4. Data
We investigate the presented topic by simulating the lack of
data based on an existing large dataset. This removes the burden of creating a suitable dataset and allows us to determine
baseline performance measurements. Multiple datasets contain
imagery and annotations suitable for object and especially vehicle detection in top-down aerial images, which have been reviewed by Azimi et al. [57] and Cazzato et al. [4]. Datasets
like DOTA [13], COWC [58], VEDAI [59], DLR-MVDA [60],
DLR-Skyscapes [61] and recently EAGLE [57], vary in resolution, type and quality of annotation, numbers of objects, classes
and images.
Considering suitability and availability, we use a modified
version of the Potsdam dataset2 , which is part of the ISPRS 2D
Semantic Labeling Contest [22]. As we do not intend to provide new high scores but work on other aspects, we decided

(a) plain colored vehicles

(b) + black vehicle outlines

(c) + partially depicted
vehicles

(d) + deformations

(e) + fine background noise

(f) + rough background
noise

(g) + annotations: object
and axis aligned bounding
boxes

(h) additional example

(i) additional example

Figure 5: Image generation steps – Beginning with plain colored vehicles, black
outlines, partially depicted vehicles, deformations and noise are added. Annotations for axis- (cyan) and object-aligned (white) bounding boxes are derived
automatically.

2 http://www2.isprs.org/commissions/comm3/wg4/2d-sem-labelpotsdam.html

5

(a) RGB image

(b) semantic
annotation

(c) object contours
(cyan)

trained with additional artificial images. In the same subsection,
we show that our approach is agnostic towards the capacity of
the feature extraction network, the ground sampling distance,
and that image augmentation is a complementary approach. To
provide a better understanding of the remaining performance
gap, we will go through the components of the image generator in Subsection 5.3. We close the experiments by showing an
analysis of the effect of the background and image composition
in Subsection 5.4.

(d) derived bounding
boxes

Figure 6: Transformation of the semantic annotation to bounding boxes – The
semantic image (b) is used to find contours of yellow image areas, that are
annotated to be class car (a), which are used to derive the cyan object- and
white axis-aligned bounding boxes (d).

5.1. Experimental Setup
For the following experiments, we use the Potsdam dataset
imagery described in Section 4. Since the Potsdam images
are too large to be processed as a whole, we cut them into
smaller patches suitable for our object detector. These patches’
size controls the derived dataset’s size, as the area covered by
the Potsdam images is fixed. Smaller patches result in larger
datasets and allow for larger batch sizes and vice versa. We further can artificially enlarge the ground sampling distance (GSD)
of the data by down-sampling the patches. This gives the option to reduce the dataset size and training times while keeping
smaller images’ benefits. In advance of our experiments, we
evaluated the interplay of the patch size, GSD, and dataset size.
The evaluation revealed that small input sizes combined with
large batch sizes and large dataset sizes lead to better model
training behavior. However, too large datasets result in prolonged training times while giving only minor performance improvements. Based on these findings, we identified the following combination as a reasonable compromise between model
performance and training times. We create patches of size 600
× 600 px and down-sample them to the object detector’s input size of 300 × 300 px, which increases the original GSD
of 0.05 m/px to 0.10 m/px. In Section 5.2 we address this
GSD enlargement and show that the resulting loss in performance can be neglected. The resulting dataset consists of 5400
patches with an overlap of 200 px for the training section and
3150 patches for the test section with 12842 and 3859 vehicles.
In the dataset, some vehicles are partially concealed by buildings or trees or cut by the patching process. We remove annotations, which are affected by this and are smaller than 20 px.
Afterward, we remove images that do not contain any vehicle.
We separate 30 % of the training images to create a validation
dataset. This results in 2039 images for training, 907 images
for validation, and 834 for testing, with 8980, 3862, and 3859
vehicles, respectively.
Our artificial images are based on eight blueprints of cars.
They consist of compact cars, sedans and station wagons of mid
and top-range cars, small and large vans, and small transporters.
These blueprints cover the common vehicles in the Potsdam
dataset. Each image contains ten vehicles, of which three are
only partial vehicles. A small test revealed that the performance
is not sensitive to the number of artificial images within a wide
range. However, with 1000 artificial images, the best detection
performance can be achieved.
Our code used for the experiments is implemented with
the pytorch [64] framework and the high-level training library
pytorch-lightning [65]. We use a pre-trained feature extraction

on this large-scale dataset since it matches our actual domain
the best, and we modify it to fit our requirements. The Potsdam dataset is created from a true ortho-mosaic with a ground
sampling distance of 0.05 m/px of the city of Potsdam and
contains thousands of vehicles. The mosaic has been cut into
38 image tiles of the size 6000 × 6000 px, divided into 24
tiles for training and 14 tiles for testing. The dataset contains
pixel-level semantic annotations of the six classes impervious
surfaces, building, low vegetation, tree, car, and
clutter background, which are color-coded by distinct colors. As we concentrate on vehicle detection, we only use the
class car, which contains cars themselves, vans, and some
trucks. We manually remove a single tram that is also annotated. Being originally designed for semantic segmentation, we
modify the dataset to fit our needs best. We use image processing to find the contours of the image areas annotated with
the class-specific color and then derive object-aligned and axisaligned bounding boxes for each contour. A sample of this process is shown in Figure 6.
As already pointed out in [62] there are erroneous annotations and artifacts caused by the structure-from-motion process, which was used to create the true ortho-mosaic. Some
connected instances have been manually split, and the artifacts
might have a small impact on detection quality. However, the
biggest issue for object detection is the annotation policy, where
the structurally top-most object decides the class. The dataset
contains multiple vehicles partially or entirely located under
trees, and hence, these vehicles are only partially or not annotated. Since the images were acquired in autumn or winter,
many of the trees are leave-less, and the annotation practice becomes an issue. The majority of these vehicles is visible to the
human eye and the object detector, leading to, formally, falsepositive detections, which degrade the performance. These
missing annotations, whose impact has been analyzed by Xu
et al.[63], are partially to blame for a remaining performance
gap.
5. Experiments
In the following subsections, we will first describe the setup
of our experiments in Subsection 5.1. In Subsection 5.2 we
continue by showing the positive effect of our artificial images
when only a few real images are available by comparing models trained with a varying amount of real images and models
6

network for our detector, which by default is a ResNet-50. It has
been trained with the ImageNet [25] dataset and is part of the
torchvision model zoo [64]. Our data is standard-normalized
with the ImageNet mean color. We use random flipping of the
x- and y-axis and random changes of brightness, contrast, hue,
and saturation as our default augmentations. If possible, we
use a batch size of 32 given the dataset size, or 16 or 8, respectively. Larger batch sizes do not show an improvement
in any aspect. We optimize our models using SGD and alter
learning rate and momentum using the one-cycle policy [66]. It
smoothly ramps up the learning from 1/25th of the peak learning rate of 0.0075, which is reached after 30 % of the training,
and afterward lowered to 1/10000th of it. Simultaneously, the
momentum starts with 0.95, is lowered to 0.85, and raised again
to 0.95. We choose to train each model with a fixed number of
steps, 2500 if not specified otherwise, rather than epochs. This
allows us to have a constant number of iterations regardless of
the dataset size. We keep track of the current best model and
load it afterward to get the best model in case of over-fitting
and divergence. The training process is stopped early when the
validation loss does not decrease within five epochs. Training
is done on single NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs with 32 GB memory. It typically takes 15 minutes and consumes six GB of GPU
memory in mixed precision memory mode.
For evaluation, we filter the predicted bounding boxes by
their confidence score with a threshold of 0.1. We compute the
average precision (AP), as described for the MS COCO dataset
[11]. Our intersection-over-union (IoU) threshold is 0.5, which
matches MS COCO’s APIoU=0.5 . All experiments are repeated
eight times, and we report mean and standard deviations for the
average precision, denoted by APµ and APσ , respectively. We
mark them with ↑ for higher is better and with ↓ for the opposite.

average precision

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Na = 0
Na = 1000
10

100
1000
number of real images Nr

Figure 7: Performance comparison for models trained with baseline (blue) and
combined datasets (orange) – The x-axis shows the number of real images (Nr )
on a logarithmic scale. The positive effect of the 1000 artificial images (Na ) is
most significant for the numbers of real images below 100, whereas it diminishes for larger numbers.

0.8 and 0.9 are reached with 32, respectively, 100 real images.
These numbers are about half of the real images needed for the
same levels when no artificial images are used. With larger
dataset sizes, the effect of adding artificial images reduces. For
the largest dataset with 2039 real and 1000 artificial images, the
average precision converges as well to 0.95.
In the following, we make a qualitative comparison of predictions of models from the two dataset groups. For this purpose,
we select the models of the datasets containing 8, 32, 64, and
150 real images since these are in the range of the most notable
differences between the two groups (see Fig. 7). Figure 8 shows
the predictions of a single image of the baseline models in the
upper row and those of the models trained with the combined
datasets in the lower row. We show bounding boxes in white,
which have confidence greater than 0.1 and are thus considered in the evaluation. Furthermore, we show bounding boxes,
with a confidence greater than 0.5 in green, which gives an impression about confidence levels. If we look at the upper row,
the model of the smallest dataset (Fig. 8a) stands out since it
does not provide useful predictions. The remaining models (see
Fig. 8b to 8d), which were trained with an increased number of
real images, show a higher detection rate, but false-negative and
false-positive detections, and fluctuations in the predicted boxes
and confidences, visible in their color changes. Overall, these
models fail to produce predictions with a reliable large confidence value and, in some cases, confuse rectangular image features with vehicles. Compared to that, the models in the bottom
row (see Fig. 8e to 8h) that have been trained with additional
artificial images show more stable results. Whereas the models
whose results are shown in the top row often produce multiple predictions per vehicle, the bottom models tend to provide
a single bounding box. Besides, more predictions have larger
confidence, illustrated with green bounding boxes. Although
the models learned on the combined datasets also tend to confuse some rectangular image regions for vehicles, their overall

5.2. Combining real and artificial images
In this first experiment, we show that our artificial images
help when only small amounts of real images are available. For
this, we create two groups of datasets:
• baseline: 12 datasets with 8 to 2039 real images, and
• combination: 12 datasets with 8 to 2039 real images and
1000 artificial images.
We train a model for each of these datasets and compare these
two groups in Figure 7, where we show the average precision
of these models.
The solid blue curve shows the baseline models’ performance. The average precision with datasets consisting only of
a few images is relatively low. With increased dataset size, the
average precision rises quickly and passes 0.8 at approximately
100 images and 0.9 at 200 images. With larger numbers of real
images, the average precision converges, reaching 0.95 for the
largest dataset with 2039 real images.
The dashed orange curve shows the average precision of the
second group models, which are trained with the combination
of real and artificial images. All of these models have an average precision larger than 0.7. The average precision levels of
7

(a) Nr = 8, Na = 0

(b) Nr = 32, Na = 0

(c) Nr = 64, Na = 0

(d) Nr = 150, Na = 0

(a) GSD 0.05 m/px

(b) GSD 0.10 m/px

(c) GSD 0.15 m/px

(d) GSD 0.2 m/px

Figure 9: Samples of the selected GSDs – The different fields of view and the
loss of detail are apparent.

(e)
Nr = 8, Na = 1000

(f)
Nr = 32, Na = 1000

(g)
Nr = 64, Na = 1000

50. Overall, the ResNet-18 performs slightly worse and does
not gain as much as the networks do.
These results show that artificial images have a positive impact regardless of the feature extraction network’s capacity.
However, the best performance requires a network with sufficient capacity, like ResNet-50. It also shows that larger networks do not perform better, and therefore the associated longer
training times, inference times, and larger memory requirements can be avoided.

(h)
Nr = 150, Na = 1000

Figure 8: Predictions of baseline models (top) and models trained with combined datasets (bottom) – The baseline models show an overall poor and fluctuating performance. Many vehicles are undetected, multiple predictions per vehicle occur, and since only a few boxes are green, the confidences are low. The
second group’s models show a stabler result with more green predictions with
larger confidences and sharper bounding boxes. Nr : number of real images, Na :
number of artificial images; white: confidence > 0.1, green: confidence > 0.5.

quality is better than the upper row models.
In summary, we see that when only a few real images are
available, a single image’s performance impact is large. In
contrast, once a certain threshold is passed, the impact reduces. Adding artificial images to a small number of real images largely improves the performance and does not harm if
larger amounts are available.
Despite this improvement, there remains a gap between what
can be achieved with large numbers of real images compared
to artificial images. With 1000 artificial images and eight real
images, we achieve 0.70 AP, whereas 1000 real images result
in 0.94 AP. It appears that the usable information content of a
single artificial image is lower than that of a real image. We
provide further investigation into this in Sections 5.3 and 5.4.
Before that, we verify the tolerance to network capacity, ground
sampling distance, and image augmentation in the following
paragraphs.

Impact of ground sampling distance. The ground sampling distance (GSD) is an essential parameter for the acquisition of
aerial images. We described in Subsection 5.1, that compared
to the original Potsdam imagery we use an increased GSD of
0.01 m/px. In order to analyze this in more detail and underline the suitability of our choice, we test the applicability of our
artificial images with various GSDs, which are: 1) the original GSD of 0.05 m/px; 2) our default GSD of 0.01 m/px; 3)
0.15 m/px; and 4) 0.20 m/px. We create images for the first
dataset by cropping image patches of the size equal to the detector’s input size of 300 × 300 px. For all other datasets, we
cut out the image patches with double/triple/quadruple image
size compared to the first dataset, which means that the fieldof-view is increasingly larger. These patches are then downsampled to 300 × 300 px, which increases the GSD. Since we
keep the study site area and the percentage of overlap the same,
the number of image patches in the dataset reduces accordingly.
Samples of these four datasets are shown in Figure 9 highlighting the loss in detail due to larger GSDs and the increased fieldof-view. For each GSD, we create 1000 artificial images of the
same size as the real patches. The images contain ten vehicles
per image, which provides a fixed number of artificial vehicles
regardless of GSD. The test results, achieved with our default
feature extraction network ResNet-50, are shown in Table 2.
Overall, the positive effect of the artificial images is observed
for all tested GSDs. However, our experiment shows a trend
of reduced overall performance with increasingly larger GSD,
which is also reported by [69]. A reason for this is that with
larger GSD, details get lost, which are helpful to distinguish
vehicles from other structures. Even though that the smallest
GSD of 0.05 m/px gives the best performance, its margin to
0.1 m/px GSD is relatively small. This shows that we do not
significantly sacrifice performance by using the latter, which
has the benefit of having a smaller dataset and hence allowing
faster training.

Impact of network capacity. In this section, we evaluate the
influence of the feature extraction network’s capacity. For this,
we select a shallow ResNet-18, a medium ResNet-50 and a deep
ResNet-152 [24]. In addition, we use a more recent ResNeXt50 [67] and a WideResNet-50 [68]. Table 1 shows the detection
performance of these models trained with five different datasets.
These include our baseline dataset, containing 2039 real images, and datasets with 8 and 150 real images, and each of them
combined with 1000 artificial images. Each column in the table
is labeled with the number real (Nr ) and artificial images (Na ).
For the baseline data sets in the second column, marked with
2039 + 0, all networks’ performance is on par within 0.02
points of AP. The results over several runs show a stable behavior as indicated by the standard deviations. The center models,
trained with 8 real images, also have similar gains when 1000
artificial images are added. All of the models on the right also
show the saturation behavior of our default network, ResNet8

Table 1: Object detection performance of baseline models and models trained with combined images for different feature extraction networks – Most models share
similar performance levels with our default architecture, ResNet-50. ResNet-18 shows a slightly worse performance on the complete real-world data set, and it also
benefits less from additional artificial images. Nr : number of real images, Na : number of artificial images; (·)*: default choice.

Nr + Na

2039 + 0
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

8+0
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

8 + 1000
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

150 + 0
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

150 + 1000
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

0.934
0.946
0.949
0.948
0.947

0.000
0.047
0.025
0.091
0.064

0.665
0.740
0.736
0.739
0.742

0.876
0.886
0.895
0.898
0.898

0.879
0.892
0.893
0.899
0.899

network
ResNet-18
ResNet-50*
ResNet-152
ResNeXt-50
WideResNet-50

0.015
0.008
0.004
0.003
0.003

0.000
0.067
0.039
0.103
0.035

0.020
0.013
0.017
0.011
0.011

0.005
0.008
0.009
0.008
0.007

0.007
0.003
0.005
0.002
0.005

Table 2: Object detection performance of baseline models and models trained with combined images for different ground sampling distances (GSDs) – A degradation
in performance is visible with larger GSDs, but the general pattern is repeated for all GSDs. Nr : number of real images, Na : number of artificial images; (·)*: default
choice.

Nr + Na
GSD [m/px]

size [px]

Nr

0.05
0.10*
0.15
0.20

300
600
900
1200

16451
2039
950
497

Nr + 0
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

8+0
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

8 + 1000
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

150 + 0
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

150 + 1000
APµ ↑ APσ ↓

0.956
0.946
0.911
0.871

0.065
0.047
0.106
0.020

0.708
0.740
0.719
0.581

0.869
0.886
0.852
0.819

0.865
0.892
0.872
0.829

0.003
0.008
0.026
0.004

0.109
0.067
0.040
0.029

Comparison with image augmentation. We stated in Section
2 that we regard image augmentation as a complementary approach to increase datasets variability. To reinforce this, we
analyze three augmentation methods, separately and in combination. These are our two default methods of random flipping
of the x and y-axis (flipping) and random alteration of hue, saturation, brightness, and contrast (radiometric), and the more
elaborate random expanding and cropping [26] (expanding &
cropping). We train models for these combinations with the
same two groups of datasets from the beginning of this section
and show the performance for the ones containing no artificial
images in Figure 10 and the ones with artificial images in Figure
11, respectively.
Figure 10 shows that the results can be divided into two
ranges. The first range spans eight to 100 images, and the second one spans 100 to 2039 images. The separation is approximately at the dataset size where the artificial images no longer
increase performance, underlining our findings from previous
experiments (see Section 5.2).
In the first range, we achieve only negligibly low detection
rates without augmentation, and the effect of the augmentations
is most significant. Individually, the simple variants achieve
improvements of almost 0.3 points of AP, and in combination
more than 0.5 points of AP. The more complex expanding and
cropping augmentation method is unstable alone and destabilizes the performance when used together with the simpler variants. In total, the differences between all variants are reduced
significantly when moving to the second range with 100 and
more images. Here, the performances converge to a range between 0.93 and 0.95 AP. Simultaneously, the performance variation reduces, which can be seen in the narrower standard deviation bands. Without any augmentation, however, we reach a

0.028
0.013
0.024
0.039

0.008
0.008
0.017
0.012

0.009
0.003
0.004
0.011

average precision

1.0
0.8
0.6

none
flipping
radiometric
expanding & cropping
flipping & radiometric
all

0.4
0.2
0.0

10

100
1000
number of real images Nr

Figure 10: Impact of image augmentation on different sized real datasets – In
the range below 100 images, the different methods’ influence is very different
and partly negative. Beyond that, the influence between the methods converges,
stabilizes, and consistently shows a positive effect.

marginally smaller accuracy of 0.93 AP.
Figure 11 shows the results for the combination of artificial
and real images using different augmentation methods. The
plot illustrates that the additional artificial images change accuracies significantly. All performance curves are clearly raised
and lie above those of Figure 10. The slope is flatter for all
variants, the distances to each other are reduced, and their effect is much more stable. Besides, the expanding and cropping
augmentation no longer results in unstable behavior and shows
a lift in performance. A significant increase in performance is
also visible when no augmentation is applied. However, the dif9

dataset contains multiple vehicles partially covered by trees or
buildings. Including a slight deformation helps increase the variety of size and shape of the vehicles and gives a rise of 0.046
points of AP. On the other hand, the deformation should not be
too large as this results in unrealistic shapes and aspect ratios
that harm the model. The most interesting aspect will be the improvement when noise is added to the background, which gives
almost 0.06 points of AP for both variants of noise combined.
The background differentiates the artificial and real images the
most, and real background typically can contain lots of structure. Our notion is that models, which have not been trained
with a background signal, can confuse these background structures with relevant objects. This is why adding a bit of structure
to the hitherto blank background results in a small step towards
more realistic backgrounds and reduces confusion.

average precision

1.0
0.8
0.6

none
flipping
radiometric
expanding & cropping
flipping & radiometric
all

0.4
0.2
0.0

10

100
1000
number of real images Nr

Figure 11: Impact of image augmentation on different sized real datasets and
additional artificial images – Adding artificial data significantly boosts and stabilizes the performance regardless of the augmentation method. The differences
between individual methods decrease. For the smallest number of real images,
there are 0.16 points of AP between the best method combination and the use
of no augmentation.

5.4. The importance of image composition
To substantiate the last section’s observation, we investigate
more in-depth into the effect the background and the image
composition has on the detection performance. We will show
the qualitative results of models trained with real and artificial
data, which makes it evident that the background structure is
important. In detail, we compose various image patches by
combining artificial and real vehicles and background, respectively, to analyze the influence of artificial and real image components on the performance.

ference between this and the best augmentation combination is
0.16 points of AP.
This last observation shows the importance of augmentation
and proves our point of seeing it as a useful complementary
approach. The combination of all three methods provides the
best performance for large enough datasets, which is in line
with the observations in [26]. We do not use the expanding
and cropping augmentation in our training scheme for all other
experiments due to the instability with small datasets.

The effect of background. Since our results indicate that adding
noise to artificial background gives performance improvements,
we provide a qualitative accuracy assessment of the predictions
for a more detailed understanding. We train and compare models with four of the previous datasets: 1) containing 2039 real
images; 2) 1000 artificial images with a plain background; 3)
1000 artificial images with a noisy background, and 4) the same
images as before extended by eight real images. Figure 12
shows the predictions these models make on a single image of
the test dataset. We show the bounding boxes in the top row and
the semantic segmentation branch’s activation maps in the bottom row. We use the same confidence thresholds and coloring
as in Figure 8.
The baseline model on the left (Fig. 12a) predicts bounding
boxes with high accuracies and produces a high-quality semantic activation map. The single white box is a false-positive as it
passes the evaluation confidence threshold but stays below 0.5.
The second model (Fig. 12b) produces many bounding boxes
that pass the lower threshold and result in a larger false-positive
rate. However, only for two vehicles, an actual high confidence
prediction exists. A significant number of false-positive pixels
are contained in the activation map, mostly located in structured
image regions but comparatively lower in more homogeneous
areas of the image. We assume this is because the artificial images’ homogeneous blank backgrounds only let the model learn
to differentiate structure from the structure-less image content.
Nevertheless, a strong signal for the image areas with actual vehicles is also present. For the third model (Fig. 12c), a small
improvement for bounding boxes in the vicinity of vehicles can

5.3. Details of the artificial image generator
To better understand the observed performance gap, we look
at different components of the generator to analyze which aspects of the images are essential. We incrementally add the
components described in Section 3.2 and visualize them in Figure 5. We further vary the deformation and background noise
hyper-parameters and create a separate dataset for each of these
variations. In this scenario, we do not use real images for training in contrast to the previous experiment. This extreme case
shows a clearer picture of the effects, which additional real images would otherwise hide. We train models for each of these
datasets and present the resulting average precision in Table 3.
The best configuration reaches about 0.68 AP, whereas, in
comparison, baseline models reach 0.64 and 0.80 AP with 32
and 64 real images, respectively. This shows that, although
these models are only trained with artificial images, they can
successfully detect objects in real images. The table shows
that each component improves the data quality and improves
the average precision. However, a few aspects are noteworthy:
If we are not using black vehicle outlines and draw them in
body color, the performance decreases by 0.032 points of AP,
which shows that the details of the objects matter and that there
is a lower limit for simplicity. The addition of partially depicted
vehicle adds 0.028 points of AP, which helps the fact that the
10

Table 3: Impact of the image generator components on the detection performance – It is apparent that structure and variation in both vehicles and background help
to improve the effectiveness of the images. The deformations should only be slight. The same applies to background noise.

border

(a) real images
(0.952 AP)

partially depicted

deform

body
black
black

X

black
black
black

X
X
X

5
10
20

black
black
black
black
black

X
X
X
X
X

5
5
5
5
5

(b) artificial images
with a plain
background
(0.627 AP)

(c) artificial images
with background
noise (0.686 AP)

fine noise

X
X
X
X
X

rough noise

5
10
15
20

APµ ↑

APσ ↓

0.521
0.553
0.581

0.021
0.014
0.009

0.627
0.610
0.561

0.009
0.005
0.006

0.660
0.683
0.686
0.674
0.662

0.008
0.004
0.004
0.010
0.014

be seen, but the model still confuses a lot of background structure with vehicles. However, a reduction of false-positive pixels
in the activation map is visible. The added noise on the image’s
background is responsible for this, as it is the only difference
between the two datasets. The last model (Fig. 12d) has been
trained with additional eight real images, which have a notable
impact on the model’s predictions. Even though not reflected
in the higher confidence boxes, the false-positive rate for both
bounding boxes and semantic segmentation decreases largely.
This is a clear hint that structure from the additional real images, of which most is background rather than vehicles, is crucial for the model. Comparing the semantic activation maps of
all three models trained with artificial images, it is apparent that
the pixel activation for actual vehicles is solid and stable. This
can also be observed for most of the remaining false-positive
image areas, mostly rectangular features, that resemble artificial vehicles’ features. Features like these are commonly called
hard negatives due to the described issues models have. The
added background information helps eradicate the majority of
false-positives and sharpens the vehicle areas but does not significantly raise more true positives.

(d) artificial images
with background
noise and eight real
images (0.736 AP)

Image composition. In order to analyze our previous findings
in more detail, we assess the performance of various image
compositions. For this, we create images by combining artificial vehicles and backgrounds with their real counterparts in
all four combinations. We use image patches from the Potsdam dataset for real backgrounds, which do not contain any
vehicles. The distribution of scenery is similar between images
without vehicles and images with vehicles so that the resulting
domain shift is minimal. We sample from the set of images that
only show background and add either real or artificial vehicles
while neglecting the semantics between foreground and background. Samples of these four datasets are shown in Figure 13
and the resulting average precision of models trained with these
datasets are shown in Table 4.
First, we compare the results for the dataset with only artificial images (see Fig. 13a for an example) and the dataset with
real vehicles on an artificial noisy background (see Fig. 13b for

Figure 12: A model trained with real images (left) in comparison with models
trained with different artificial images (top: predicted bounding boxes, green:
confidence > 0.5, white: confidence > 0.1; bottom: semantic activation map) –
In contrast to the left baseline model, the other models show significant falsepositives for both types of predictions, but, a clear trend in improvement is
visible in the semantic activation with more elaborate background and addition
of some real images.

11

the performance of small real datasets notably and that semantics do not play a significant role. The latter finding is promising since otherwise, semantically correct images would need
to be created, which is challenging due to arbitrarily complex
geometric conditions. Finally, we found that creating images
with artificial vehicles and real backgrounds instead of a simple
noisy background does not largely improve the performance.
We expect that our observations and findings can point towards
important aspects of the image composition and lead to improvements of artificial data that can further reduce the gap
towards real data and boost their positive effect on small real
datasets.

(a) artificial vehicles (b) real vehicles and (c) artificial vehicles (d) real vehicles and
and artificial
artificial background and real random
real random
background
background
background

Figure 13: Samples of mutually combined real and artificial vehicles and background – The difference in degree of detail is apparent between a) and b), the
vehicles in c) look foreign to the background and the ignored semantics stand
out, which is also the case for d).
Table 4: Average precision (AP) of models trained with the datasets containing
mutually combined real and artificial vehicles and background.

vehicles

background

APµ ↑

APσ ↓

artificial
real
artificial
real
real

artificial
artificial
real random
real random
real

0.686
0.733
0.726
0.890
0.932

0.004
0.008
0.009
0.006
0.009

6. Conclusion and future work
In this work, we addressed the limited data availability for vehicle detection in aerial imagery and provided insights into the
gain from adding artificial imagery to the training dataset. The
core of our framework consists of a RetinaNet detector, which
is modified to be particularly suitable for our task. We utilized
a generative approach to create artificial images from simplified 2D CAD drawings and analyzed their impact on the performance. In order to follow our objective of providing a better understanding of the effect of a lack of data and to what extent artificial data can compensate this effect, for our experiments, we
simulated a small dataset based on the ISPRS Potsdam dataset.
Experiments with additional artificial images, based on eight
2D CAD blueprints, reveal that more stable results and a significantly higher performance rate can be achieved. For example,
we have seen a gain of about 0.7 points of average precision
when using 8 real images with additional 1000 artificial images.
Moreover, we observed that models trained with only artificial
images are able to detect vehicles in real images, where we
reached similar gains with 0.68 average precision points when
using 1000 artificial images.
Our key findings of our work are:

an example). Since both datasets do not contain detailed background information, the average precision gap can be attributed
to the differences between the vehicles. As the difference in
accuracy is less than 0.05 points of AP, we suppose that our relatively simple artificial vehicles already contain useful, relevant
features for training a model for vehicle detection. More photorealistic vehicles and a more fine-tuned selection of blueprints
can potentially close the small accuracy gap.
Comparing the results obtained from the dataset with standard artificial images (Fig. 13a) and the results obtained with
the dataset containing artificial vehicles on real background
(Fig. 13c), we analyze whether real background can significantly improve performance. Since the gain in accuracy is
0.04, which is significant but relatively low, our experiments
indicate that using real background information alone will not
significantly improve the artificial images’ usefulness. For a
human observer, it is obvious that the artificial vehicles look
like foreign objects. Therefore we suspect that a more harmonized combination [48] and using domain adaption [17, 20]
could help to improve performance.
Neglecting the semantics between foreground and background can result in incorrect placement of vehicles, as they
can randomly be placed on houses or other structures, where
they, in reality, typically would not appear. Therefore, in our
last sub-experiment, we analyze the importance of these semantics and compare the datasets’ results with real vehicles on either matching or randomized real backgrounds (see Fig. 13d).
The average precision of 0.89 obtained from the latter dataset is
marginally smaller than the average precision of 0.93 obtained
from the baseline dataset. The difference between these values
can be accounted to the loss of semantics.
To sum up, the experiments show that our artificially designed vehicles already contain important features to improve

• datasets containing only a very few samples have a severe
impact on the achievable detection performance;
• for small datasets, adding new samples has a large impact
that decreases as the dataset gets larger;
• adding simple artificial images can alleviate a lack of
real data and significantly improve object detection performance;
• the use of artificial images showed to be beneficial regardless of network capacity and ground sampling distance;
• for small datasets enhanced with images containing artificial objects, the remaining performance gap to large real
datasets cannot be closed by using real backgrounds;
• semantics plays a subordinate role when real or artificial
objects are combined with different backgrounds;
• adding artificial images is a complementary approach to
image augmentation.
12

Our work builds the basis for promising future directions:
Without the need to collect and annotate real data, this can be
a great advantage for object detection, especially for classes
that do not frequently occur in reality. If the combination of
real background and artificial vehicles can be successfully implemented, an artificial generator can provide a high degree of
freedom in image creation. A promising direction is to disentangle the underlying factors of variation of foreground and
background at the image level and use them for an improved
generation process. Instead of using all combinations of background and foreground, relevant factors could be simulated and
their combination modeled in the network. Especially for remote sensing, where various sceneries may occur, this would be
a great advantage. We also see a promising direction in finding
out more about which elements in real-world objects lead to a
significant performance increase. Knowing which elements are
crucial, the effort of artificial data generation can be kept low
with a maximum possible performance increase.

[13] G.-S. Xia, X. Bai, J. Ding, Z. Zhu, S. Belongie, J. Luo, M. Datcu,
M. Pelillo, L. Zhang, Dota: A large-scale dataset for object detection
in aerial images, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 3974–3983.
[14] A. Van Etten, Satellite imagery multiscale rapid detection with windowed
networks, in: 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), IEEE, 2019, pp. 735–743.
[15] C. Sun, A. Shrivastava, S. Singh, A. Gupta, Revisiting unreasonable effectiveness of data in deep learning era, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 843–852.
[16] R. Takahashi, T. Matsubara, K. Uehara, Data augmentation using random
image cropping and patching for deep cnns, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology.
[17] B. Sun, K. Saenko, Deep coral: Correlation alignment for deep domain
adaptation, in: European conference on computer vision, Springer, 2016,
pp. 443–450.
[18] Q. Xie, M.-T. Luong, E. Hovy, Q. V. Le, Self-training with noisy student
improves imagenet classification, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 10687–
10698.
[19] X. Peng, B. Sun, K. Ali, K. Saenko, Learning deep object detectors from
3d models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1278–1286.
[20] Y. Koga, H. Miyazaki, R. Shibasaki, A method for vehicle detection in
high-resolution satellite images that uses a region-based object detector
and unsupervised domain adaptation, Remote Sensing 12 (3) (2020) 575.
[21] K. Zheng, M. Wei, G. Sun, B. Anas, Y. Li, Using vehicle synthesis generative adversarial networks to improve vehicle detection in remote sensing images, ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 8 (9) (2019)
390.
[22] F. Rottensteiner, G. Sohn, M. Gerke, J. D. Wegner, ISPRS Test Project
on Urban Classification and 3D Building Reconstruction, , ISPRS Commission III - Photogrammetric Computer Vision and Image Analysis, Working Group III / 4 - 3D Scene Analysis (2013).
[23] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, Imagenet classification with
deep convolutional neural networks, Communications of the ACM 60 (6)
(2017) 84–90.
[24] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[25] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, L. Fei-Fei, Imagenet: A
large-scale hierarchical image database, in: 2009 IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, Ieee, 2009, pp. 248–255.
[26] W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C.-Y. Fu, A. C.
Berg, Ssd: Single shot multibox detector, in: European conference on
computer vision, Springer, 2016, pp. 21–37.
[27] T. DeVries, G. W. Taylor, Improved regularization of convolutional neural
networks with cutout, arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552.
[28] S. Yun, D. Han, S. J. Oh, S. Chun, J. Choe, Y. Yoo, Cutmix: Regularization strategy to train strong classifiers with localizable features, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
2019, pp. 6023–6032.
[29] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, D. Lopez-Paz, mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization, arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412.
[30] Z. Zhang, T. He, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Li, Bag of
freebies for training object detection neural networks, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.04103.
[31] A. Sharif Razavian, H. Azizpour, J. Sullivan, S. Carlsson, Cnn features
off-the-shelf: an astounding baseline for recognition, in: Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, 2014, pp. 806–813.
[32] R. B. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, J. Malik, Rich feature hierarchies
for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1311.2524.
[33] Z. Shen, Z. Liu, J. Li, Y.-G. Jiang, Y. Chen, X. Xue, Object detection from
scratch with deep supervision, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence 42 (2) (2019) 398–412.
[34] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 2223–2232.
[35] D. Berthelot, N. Carlini, I. Goodfellow, N. Papernot, A. Oliver, C. A.

Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank the DVGW – German Technical and Scientific Association for Gas and Water – for funding
this work as part of the research project G201819 - Antonia.

References
[1] C. Heipke, F. Rottensteiner, Deep learning for geometric and semantic
tasks in photogrammetry and remote sensing, Geo-spatial Information
Science (2020) 1–10.
[2] L. H. Kaack, G. H. Chen, M. G. Morgan, Truck traffic monitoring with
satellite images, in: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGCAS Conference
on Computing and Sustainable Societies, 2019, pp. 155–164.
[3] L. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Ye, G. Yin, B. A. Johnson, Deep learning in
remote sensing applications: A meta-analysis and review, ISPRS journal
of photogrammetry and remote sensing 152 (2019) 166–177.
[4] D. Cazzato, C. Cimarelli, J. L. Sanchez-Lopez, H. Voos, M. Leo, A survey
of computer vision methods for 2d object detection from unmanned aerial
vehicles, Journal of Imaging 6 (8) (2020) 78.
[5] C. J. Torney, D. J. Lloyd-Jones, M. Chevallier, D. C. Moyer, H. T. Maliti,
M. Mwita, E. M. Kohi, G. C. Hopcraft, A comparison of deep learning
and citizen science techniques for counting wildlife in aerial survey images, Methods in Ecology and Evolution 10 (6) (2019) 779–787.
[6] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, J. Sun, Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
detection with region proposal networks, in: Advances in neural information processing systems, 2015, pp. 91–99.
[7] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, P. Dollár, Focal loss for dense
object detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[8] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, A. Farhadi, You only look once: unified, real-time object detection (2015), arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02640.
[9] M. Tan, R. Pang, Q. V. Le, Efficientdet: Scalable and efficient object
detection, in: 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 10778–10787. doi:10.1109/
CVPR42600.2020.01079.
[10] A. Bochkovskiy, C.-Y. Wang, H.-Y. M. Liao, Yolov4: Optimal speed and
accuracy of object detection, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10934.
[11] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan,
P. Dollár, C. L. Zitnick, Microsoft coco: Common objects in context,
in: European Conference on Computer Vision, 2014, pp. 740–755.
[12] P. Sun, G. Chen, G. Luke, Y. Shang, Salience biased loss for object detection in aerial images, arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08103.

13

Raffel, Mixmatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning, in:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 5050–
5060.
[36] K. Sohn, D. Berthelot, C.-L. Li, Z. Zhang, N. Carlini, E. D. Cubuk, A. Kurakin, H. Zhang, C. Raffel, Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with consistency and confidence, arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07685.
[37] K. Sohn, Z. Zhang, C.-L. Li, H. Zhang, C.-Y. Lee, T. Pfister, A simple
semi-supervised learning framework for object detection, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.04757.
[38] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, G. Hinton, A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.05709.
[39] M. Stark, M. Goesele, B. Schiele, Back to the future: Learning
shape models from 3d cad data, in: Proceedings of the British
Machine Vision Conference, BMVA Press, 2010, pp. 106.1–106.11,
doi:10.5244/C.24.106.
[40] Y. Movshovitz-Attias, T. Kanade, Y. Sheikh, How useful is photo-realistic
rendering for visual learning?, in: European Conference on Computer
Vision, Springer, 2016, pp. 202–217.
[41] J. Tremblay, A. Prakash, D. Acuna, M. Brophy, V. Jampani, C. Anil,
T. To, E. Cameracci, S. Boochoon, S. Birchfield, Training deep networks
with synthetic data: Bridging the reality gap by domain randomization,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops, 2018, pp. 969–977.
[42] S. R. Richter, V. Vineet, S. Roth, V. Koltun, Playing for data: Ground
truth from computer games, in: European conference on computer vision,
Springer, 2016, pp. 102–118.
[43] J. Shermeyer, T. Hossler, A. Van Etten, D. Hogan, R. Lewis, D. Kim,
Rareplanes: Synthetic data takes flight, arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02963.
[44] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, Y. Bengio, Generative adversarial nets, in: Advances in neural information processing systems, 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[45] A. Shrivastava, T. Pfister, O. Tuzel, J. Susskind, W. Wang, R. Webb,
Learning from simulated and unsupervised images through adversarial
training, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 2107–2116.
[46] T. Park, M.-Y. Liu, T.-C. Wang, J.-Y. Zhu, Semantic image synthesis with
spatially-adaptive normalization, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 2337–2346.
[47] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, V. Lempitsky, Deep image prior, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2018, pp. 9446–9454.
[48] A. Bhattad, D. A. Forsyth, Cut-and-paste neural rendering, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.05907.
[49] Y. Xian, C. H. Lampert, B. Schiele, Z. Akata, Zero-shot learning—a comprehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and the ugly, IEEE transactions
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 41 (9) (2018) 2251–2265.
[50] T. Ophoff, S. Puttemans, V. Kalogirou, J.-P. Robin, T. Goedemé, Vehicle
and vessel detection on satellite imagery: A comparative study on singleshot detectors, Remote Sensing 12 (7) (2020) 1217.
[51] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, S. Belongie, Feature pyramid networks for object detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 2117–
2125.
[52] Z. Tian, C. Shen, H. Chen, T. He, Fcos: Fully convolutional one-stage
object detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, 2019, pp. 9627–9636.
[53] S. Zhang, C. Chi, Y. Yao, Z. Lei, S. Z. Li, Bridging the gap between
anchor-based and anchor-free detection via adaptive training sample selection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 9759–9768.
[54] P. F. Jaeger, S. A. Kohl, S. Bickelhaupt, F. Isensee, T. A. Kuder, H.-P.
Schlemmer, K. H. Maier-Hein, Retina u-net: Embarrassingly simple exploitation of segmentation supervision for medical object detection, in:
Machine Learning for Health Workshop, PMLR, 2020, pp. 171–183.
[55] H. Rezatofighi, N. Tsoi, J. Gwak, A. Sadeghian, I. Reid, S. Savarese,
Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a loss for bounding
box regression, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 658–666.
[56] Z. Zheng, P. Wang, W. Liu, J. Li, R. Ye, D. Ren, Distance-iou loss: Faster
and better learning for bounding box regression., in: AAAI, 2020, pp.

12993–13000.
[57] S. Majid Azimi, R. Bahmanyar, C. Henry, F. Kurz, Eagle: Large-scale vehicle detection dataset inreal-world scenarios using aerial imagery, arXiv
e-prints (2020) arXiv–2007.
[58] T. N. Mundhenk, G. Konjevod, W. A. Sakla, K. Boakye, A large contextual dataset for classification, detection and counting of cars with deep
learning, in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2016,
pp. 785–800.
[59] S. Razakarivony, F. Jurie, Vehicle detection in aerial imagery: A small
target detection benchmark, Journal of Visual Communication and Image
Representation 34 (2016) 187–203.
[60] K. Liu, G. Mattyus, Fast multiclass vehicle detection on aerial images,
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 12 (9) (2015) 1938–1942.
[61] S. M. Azimi, C. Henry, L. Sommer, A. Schumann, E. Vig, Skyscapes
fine-grained semantic understanding of aerial scenes, in: Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 7393–
7403.
[62] I. Weber, J. Bongartz, R. Roscher, Learning with real-world and artificial
data for improved vehicle detection in aerial imagery., ISPRS Annals of
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing & Spatial Information Sciences 5 (2).
[63] M. Xu, Y. Bai, B. Ghanem, B. Liu, Y. Gao, N. Guo, X. Ye, F. Wan, H. You,
D. Fan, et al., Missing labels in object detection., in: CVPR Workshops,
2019.
[64] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al., Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library, in: Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2019, pp. 8026–8037.
[65] W.
Falcon,
Pytorch
lightning,
GitHub.
Note:
https://github.com/PyTorchLightning/pytorch-lightning 3.
[66] L. N. Smith, A disciplined approach to neural network hyper-parameters:
Part 1 – learning rate, batch size, momentum, and weight decay (2018).
arXiv:1803.09820.
[67] S. Xie, R. Girshick, P. Dollár, Z. Tu, K. He, Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 1492–1500.
[68] S. Zagoruyko, N. Komodakis, Wide residual networks, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.07146.
[69] J. Shermeyer, A. Van Etten, The effects of super-resolution on object detection performance in satellite imagery, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, 2019, pp.
0–0.

14

